A sack sack bag (also known regionally as a sack) is a common tool in the form of a non-rigid container. The use of sack bags predates recorded history, with the earliest sack s being no more than lengths of animal skin, cotton, or woven plant fibers, folded up at the edges and secured in that shape with strings of the same material.[1]

Despite their simplicity, sack  have been fundamental for the development of human civilization, as they allow people to easily collect loose materials such as berries or food grains, and to transport more items than could readily be carried in the hands.[1] The word probably has its origins in the Norse word sack baggi,[2] from the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European bʰak, but is also comparable to the Welsh baich (load, bundle), and the Greek βάσταγμα (bástagma, load).

Cheap disposable paper sack bags and plastic shopping sack  are very common in the retail trade as a convenience for shoppers, and are often supplied by the shop for free or for a small fee. Customers may also take their own shopping sack bags to some shops. Although paper had been used for purposes of wrapping and padding in ancient China since the 2nd century BC,[3] the first use of paper sack bags (for preserving the flavor of tea) in China came during the later Tang Dynasty.

sack bags have been around for hundreds of years and have been used by both men and women. sack bags have been prevalent as far back as ancient Egypt. Many hieroglyphs depict males with sack bags tied around their waist. The Bible mentions pouches, especially Judas Iscariot, carrying one around, holding his personal items. In the 14th century, wary of pickpockets and thieves, many people used drawstring sack bags, in which to carry their money. These sack bags were attached to "girdles" via a long cord fastened to the waist.

Women also wore more ornate drawstring sack bags, typically called hamondeys or tasques, to display their social status. The 14th-century handsack bags evolved into wedding gifts from groom to bride. These medieval pouches were embroidered, often with depictions of love stories or songs. Eventually, these pouches evolved into what is known as a chaneries, which were used for gaming or food for falcons. During the Renaissance, Elizabethan England's fashions were more ornate than ever before. Women's wore their pouches underneath the vast array of petticoats and men wore leather pockets or sack ges inside their breeches. Aristocrats began carrying swete sack bagges filled with sweet-smelling material to make up for poor hygiene.

In the modern world, sack  are ubiquitous,[1] with many people routinely carrying a wide variety of them in the form of cloth or leather briefcases, handsack bags, and backpacks, and with sack  made from more disposable materials such as paper or plastic being used for shopping, and to carry home groceries. A sack  may be closable by a zipper, snap fastener, etc., or simply by folding (e.g. in the case of a paper sack bag). Sometimes a money sack  or travel sack  has a lock. The sack  likely predates the inflexible variant, the basket, and sack  usually have the additional advantage over baskets of being fold-able or otherwise compressible to smaller sizes. On the other hand, baskets, being made of more rigid material, may better protect their contents.

An empty sack  may or may not be very light and foldable to a small size. If it is, this is convenient for carrying it to the place where it is needed, such as a shop, and for storage of empty sack bags. sack  vary from small ones, like purses, to large ones for use in traveling like a suitcase. The pockets of clothing are also a kind of sack , built into the clothing for the carrying of suitably small objects.

There are environmental concerns regarding use and disposal of plastic shopping and trash sack . Efforts are being taken to control and reduce their use in some European Union countries, including Ireland and the Netherlands. In some cases the cheap sack bags are taxed so the customer must pay a fee where they may not have done previously. Sometimes heavy duty reusable plastic and fabric sack bags are sold, typically costing €0.5 to €1, and these may replace disposable sack bags entirely. Sometimes free replacements are offered when the sack  wears out. A notable exception to this trend is the UK, where disposable plastic sack  are still freely available and are dominant. This trend has spread to some cities in the United States.

A sack  may or may not be disposable; however, even a disposable sack  can often be used many times, for economic and environmental reasons. On the other hand, there may be logistic or hygienic reasons to use a sack bag only once. For example, a garsack bage sack bag is often disposed of with its content. A sack bag for packaging a disposable product is often disposed of when it is empty. Similarly, sack bags used as receptacles in medical procedures, such as the colostomy sack bag used to collect waste from a surgically diverted biological system, are typically disposed of as medical waste. Many snack foods, such as pretzels, cookies, and potato chips, are available in disposable single-use sealed sack bags.
