He wanted to study at the prestigious Juilliard School of Music, as he was entitled to do as an ex-GI. 
But then in 1955 he was offered the chance to tour with the band of another ex-Ellington musician, altoist Johnny Hodges. 
Unfortunately for Eric, Johnny decided to rejoin Duke three months later and broke up the band.   


What would Morrissey's solo stuff sound like? 
Would he tour with a band? 
Would Marr get a band together?  


What a stage production brings out is that the film we know is hardly Bernstein at all. 
Only three of his 17 numbers were used &dash. including the evergreen New York, New York &dash. and among the `missing" 14 numbers there are three or four hauntingly sentimental Bernstein tunes full of unexpected twists, including Gabe's Lucky To Be Me and the ensemble song, Some Other Time, ingenious in its contrapuntal entries, not to mention a show-stopping point number, one of Bernstein's boyhood pieces, I Can Cook Too. 
The Guildhall School's big advantage is to have an orchestra on hand from the music department that vies with any theatre band anywhere, and from the overture through to the playout music Chris Walker and his brilliant and brassy young team were electrifying. 

HOT favourite Carmels Prince looks set to lord it over his rivals in the final of the #5,000 Hawkins of Harrow Pall Mall over 450 metres at the Stadium tonight. 
The 50th running of the famous event will be marked in grand style with a jazz band in attendance and trumpets will herald the runners as they parade for the big event.  

Morrissey took his flower fetish to extraordinary proportions. 
The band spent a fortune on chrysanthemums, employing people to distribute them at every gig.   




Soukous, on the other hand, stuck fast, possibly because its light, tight-knit, fast rhythms were in direct contrast to the scattered harmonies of the rumba. 
The new sound inspired a new generation of young band in the Seventies.   


After an album like that one needs some serious silliness, which is this week provided by the B-52s, the classic exponents of American kitsch. 
It seemed that the band were finished when guitarist Ricky Wilson died of cancer in 1985, just before Bouncing Off The Satellites was released, but now they are back, with Keith Strickland switching from drums to guitar, and a collection of guests (including former Gang Of Four bassist Sara Lee) providing the rhythm section.   


The Smiths were not helping this cause. 
Even as the day began, rumours were rife that the band had refused to play.   


If I'm with Ibrahim, I go to bed when he tells me,  otherwise I just go to bed when I'm tired. 
It's pretty noisy at night-time, specially if there's a band practising in the house.   


However, considering the tightly controlled aloofness and the fact that Joyce (whose contributions in a musical capacity are not in doubt) has led a deliberately low profile, one cannot blame Kent for the omission. 
This is a problem which the band themselves could easily solve by restructuring their media policy. 


Squeeze &dash. A Round And A Bout (IRS). 
The <tag "532736">band's</> first live album gives considerable space to their more recent material, but it is the old favourites like Pulling Mussels From A Shell and Tempted which really shine.   


Nobody over the past few seasons has quite been able to stand up to Prokofiev's Second Piano Concerto, and Joselson on the strength of a terrifically weighty cadenza, is the man to play it. 
Time Between &dash. The Byrds (from Younger Than Yesterday, CBS 1967) Byrds bassist Chris Hillman had originally been a teenage mandolin prodigy, and would infiltrate country-style pieces into the band eclectic mix.   




Return is by way of the old Roman road to Biberwier. 
At night, Lermoos offers relaxed entertainment in the best Tyrolean manner; the village band plays weekly concerts and there are Tyrolean Evenings, fondues and other activities; see our Enterprise Representative on arrival.   


A five-piece featuring three guitarists, a drummer and a purple-headed girl singer) they, like all Berliners, had plenty to celebrate: they had just released their first album. 
The band sounded like Talking Heads going through a middle-European phase. 
 


Likewise the black-clad new country followers hoping for another Nanci Griffith. 
Like all the best American rock band, 10,000 Maniacs play a rich, riveting mixture of styles, which, with a pre-meditation bordering on the vicious, clash and confuse.   
   


At Heaton Park in Manchester a supposedly huge anti-heroin open air concert was being planned. 
The organisers had already begun to promise a strong local bill topped by the two biggest attractions in Manchester at the time, The Chameleons and, of course, The Smiths. 
This came as a surprise to the band as they had never agreed to play the concert at all and they immediately issued a statement to this effect, fearing that many of their fans were being lured into buying tickets for a Smiths free event.   


Memphis In The Meantime casts a somewhat sly glance at his home town's tendency towards bland inbreeding, and kicks like a distempered mule. 
You Ain't Going Nowhere &dash. Nitty Gritty Dirt Band (Will The Circle Be Unbroken Vol2, MCA 1989) Roger McGuinn and Chris Hillman reprise a Dylan song they made famous with the Byrds, as the Dirt Band bring the relationship between rock and country up to date. 


When trombonist Turk Murphy first heard this band in 1937 it consisted of a rhythm section, four brasses and three reed instruments that, as Murphy said, `never played together". 
Later Turk joined the band himself. 
At this time it was fashionable to have a band within a band, in other words, a small group drawn from the full band &dash. Benny Goodman's Sextet, Bob Crosby's Bob Cats and Artie Shaw's Grammercy Five, for example. 




