THE JESUS AND MARY CHAIN They used to produce a noise like that of welders at work on an aircraft. 
Nowadays they are merely noisy in the manner of a rock band.   

So, one fine morning the magazine's publisher and feature writer received a notice informing them that Steven Morrissey and Johnny Marr were proceeding with an action for defamation of character. 
It seemed bizarre that a band plagued by such huge problems on an international scale should wish to waste their time attempting to sue a small time and, to be frank, penniless magazine. 

JESUS JONES Liquidizer (Food FOODLP 3) Appropriately titled, Liquidizer is a particularly abrasive variant on today's blender-culture music, mixing together garage punk guitars, house rhythms and samples, and pop-wise melodies. 
The band debut hit single `Info Freako" is typical of the method used throughout: every sound here reaches one's ears through a variety of effects boxes; the feverish scratch of guitars, wail of voices and babble of samples are all treated, phased, echoed and otherwise distorted out of shape and harnessed to a steady beat somewhere &dash. according to the helpful sleeve annotations &dash. between 110 and 125 beats per minute.   

This works to `dull" a band's sense of adventure and as the work rate intensifies, it is a natural reaction to concentrate on artistic input and leave the fundamentals (tour organisation and administrative chores) to those employed for the purpose. 
A rumour began to circulate around the cocktail bars of the music biz e&acute.lite that The Smiths were unhappy with Rough Trade and, although still tied with contracts, were seeking to move away. 
Obviously every record company in Britain wasted no time in sniffing out the possibilities of picking up the band.

In that final respect, the Healey was like the Cobra, but the Cobra didn't even have external door handles, just simple pulls inside which you reach in to open. 
There was no space for two small children or one transversely-mounted adult, not a trace of walnut, and if you wanted to listen to a radio in a Cobra you'd have needed speakers that wouldn't have disgraced a heavy-metal band. 

The  succumbed to The Smiths success by parading a lengthy Smiths interview by Biba Kopf, a writer not known for his enthusiasm for the Smiths. 
Although hardly succeeding in exposing the conflict between the band artistic stance and their situation (which was the probable intention), the dual interview of Morrissey and Marr did, for once, produce worthy quotes.   

`Between about three months and a year, I should say." 
CELEBRATING THEIR 25th anniversary this month are VARIOUS, one of the most talented and prolific band in the country.   


`I'd rather be a solo singer like Madonna." 
Having been together for over a year, FHC see the band as a good professional experience.  


Nobody wanted to risk losing that interview. 
Those who thought that Morrissey's profile in 1984 was becoming detached from the rest of the band certainly couldn't have appreciated the enormous media attention he generated in spring 1985. 

But not for Pellow the mutual flattery and the chummy linking of arms which normally accompanies the invited guest. 
Gabriel, stranded in a frock-coat, stage right, had to settle for looking on in amazement, while Pellow ran amok, attempting to mount all the set's various staircases simultaneously. 

This band, he seemed to be saying, is nobody's damp squib.  

800044
Kingston: 
`There have been some quite strong rumours flying around Manchester that the band are about to split up &ellip   

800045
Over the next decade Eric came to fame with the Count until he left to retire from music in 1972. 
But he picked up his career again when he rejoined Basie in 1975, and stayed with the band under Frank Foster's leadership after Basie's death in 1984.   

800046
Though a little languid at low revs, a trait of multi-valve engines, the GT is a fast and willing revver which doesn't suffer the high-rev harshness of some 16- valvers. 
This encourages you to use the engine hard and exploit its strength in the mid-range to top-end of its performance band. 

800047
Hotel guests are entitled to a 50% reduction on green fees at the 9-hole `golf academy" in the village. 
This luxurious hotel is rated amongst the top hotels in Austria, 450 years ago the building was a monastery, and the original parts of the structure with vaulted ceilings give added atmosphere to the Brau Keller (where a Tyrolean band plays nightly). 

800048
It sounds pathetic but I'm also still quite awestruck when I talk to famous people." 
Ironically band feel the same way towards Peel. 

800051
Instead of talking a lot herself and making the family feel ignorant, she drew them out with questions about themselves. 
Raymond told her about his band and Sandra told her about hairstyling and Gary told her about computer games and his father told her about how he and Vic's mother had married on thirty-five bob a week and hadn't considered themselves poor.   

800052
David Bowie `disappeared" to Berlin in the mid-Seventies to re-emerge with a stark album called `Low", wearing jodphurs, and exhibiting a tendency for Nazi salutes. 
Iggi Pop and Lou Reed, rock music's senior citizens of underground cool, both worked in Berlin, and by the early Eighties a whole group of younger, hero-worshipping New Romantic band were imitating the Berlin pose, shooting their videos in black and white from dramatic angles and affecting military headgear and leather overcoats. 


`It should feel a bit more like going to a festival, where the peripheral things are always really important. 
That's why we've had things like the Dream Machine, and setting up a Chill Out room &dash. so that people feel they're involved in different things, yet connected to the band. 






Not as hopeless as expected but still a million miles from anything approaching relevance or interest. 
Stereotyical old dance beats, the same old rave mentality &dash. and will therefore sell by the bucketload. 
If this is how band who openly admit to being influenced by The Clash sound today, poor old Strummer and Jones can't be getting much sleep at night.   


Kenny `Pancho" Hagood was one of several fine baritone singers who patterned their styles on that of the influential Billy Eckstine in the 1940s. 
Like Earl Coleman, Johnny Hartman and Arthur Prysock, Hagood started his career as a band singer and was featured from 1946 to 1948 with the Dizzy Gillespie orchestra. 


As somebody once said, celibacy lies next to orgasm. 
What Morrissey still can't come to terms with is that now, for some strange reason, hordes of people profess to have fallen in love with him and previous to the band, he often states, no girl ever even took him into consideration.   

But a new career opened up for him. 
He had played with the Eric Robinson Orchestra at the BBC and in the marvellous band which backed the Goon Show. 
He was in the band for Crackerjack and the Benny Hill Show.   

Photograph (omitted): A woman taking a photograph of a mural in Deptford, south-east London, based on the theme of Love Over Gold, a record album by the group Dire Straits. 
The album had been inspired by graffiti spotted on the wall when a member of the band, Mark Knopfler, lived on the nearby Crossfields estate   

Needless to say, they were well primed for The Smiths. 
The band caused a sensation on New Year's Eve, helping to produce, by all accounts, a classic evening. 
Joe Moss, however, was beginning to feel ill at ease as the rest of the band indulged in typical rock 'n' roll trappings that were at odds with Morrissey's stated philosophy. 


This said, the gig did finish with a mass stage invasion, another example of the band gathering an intensely fanatical following. 
The tour was appropriately chaotic, as most rock tours are: their first taste of the twenty-four hour a day, day to day flogging to which they would have to submit in order to compete. 
Days of casual romanticism were seemingly lost and dark cliche&acute.-ridden existence of the typical `on the road" band was, it appeared, the only possible future.  



TOP OF THE POPS The daddy, indeed the yardstick, of all modern pop shows. 
Chart-topping band play before swarming masses of hip-hopping teenagers, marshalled around the studio by clipboard-wielding floor-managers.   






