A band is a small section of the spectrum of radio communication frequency, in which channels are usually used or set aside for the same purpose.
Above 300  , the absorption of electromagnetic radiation by Earth's atmosphere is so great that the atmosphere is effectively opaque, until it becomes transparent again in the near-infrared and optical window frequency ranges.
To prevent interference and allow for efficient use of the radio spectrum, similar services are allocated in bands. For example, broadcasting, mobile radio, or navigation devices, will be allocated in non-overlapping ranges of frequency.
Each of these bands has a basic bandplan which dictates how it is to be used and shared, to avoid interference and to set protocol for the compatibility of transmitters and receivers. 
As a matter of convention, the ITU divides the radio spectrum into 12 bands, each beginning at a wavelength which is a power of ten (10n) metres, with corresponding frequency of 3×108-n hertz, and each covering a decade of frequency or wavelength. Each of these bands has a traditional name. For example, the term high frequency (HF) designates the wavelength range from 100 to 10 metres, corresponding to a frequency range of 3  to 30 . This is just a naming convention and is not related to allocation; the ITU further divides each band into subbands allocated to different uses.
The ITU radio bands are designations defined in the ITU Radio Regulations. Article 2, provision No. 2.1 states that "the radio spectrum shall be subdivided into nine frequency bands, which shall be designated by progressive whole numbers in accordance with the following table[4]".
The table originated with a recommendation of the IVth CCIR meeting, held in Bucharest in 1937, and was approved by the International Radio Conference held at Atlantic City in 1947. The idea to give each band a number, in which the number is the logarithm of the approximate geometric mean of the upper and lower band limits in Hz, originated with B.C. Fleming-Williams, who suggested it in a letter to the editor of Wireless Engineer in 1942. (For example, the approximate geometric mean of Band 7 is 10 , or 107 Hz.
Broadcasting[edit]
Broadcast frequency:
Longwave AM Radio
Mediumwave AM Radio 
Shortwave AM Radio 
Designations for television and  radio broadcast frequency vary between countries, see Television channel frequency and  broadcast band. Since   and  frequency are desirable for many uses in urban areas, in North America some parts of the former television broadcasting band have been reassigned to cellular phone and various land mobile communications systems. Even within the allocation still dedicated to television, TV-band devices use channels without local broadcasters.
The Apex band in the United States was a pre-WWII allocation for   audio broadcasting; it was made obsolete after the introduction of  broadcasting.
Air band[edit]
Airband refers to  frequency 118 to 137 , used for navigation and voice communication with aircraft. Trans-oceanic aircraft also carry  radio and satellite transceivers.
Marine band[edit]
The greatest incentive for development of radio was the need to communicate with ships out of visual range of shore. From the very early days of radio, large oceangoing vessels carried powerful long-wave and medium-wave transmitters. High-frequency allocations are still designated for ships, although satellite systems have taken over some of the safety applications previously served by 500  and other frequency. 2182  is a medium-wave frequency still used for marine emergency communication.
Marine   radio is used in coastal waters and relatively short-range communication between vessels and to shore stations. Radios are channelized, with different channels used for different purposes; marine Channel 16 is used for calling and emergencies.
Amateur radio frequency[edit]
Amateur radio frequency allocations vary around the world. Several bands are common for amateurs worldwide, usually in the HF part of the spectrum. Other bands are national or regional allocations only due to differing allocations for other services, especially in the   and  parts of the radio spectrum.
Citizens' band and personal radio services[edit]
Citizens' band radio is allocated in many countries, using channelized radios in the upper HF part of the spectrum (around 27 ). It is used for personal, small business and hobby purposes. Other frequency allocations are used for similar services in different jurisdictions, for example  CB is allocated in Australia. A wide range of personal radio services exist around the world, usually emphasizing short-range communication between individuals or for small businesses, simplified or no license requirements, and usually  transceivers using around 1 watt or less.
Industrial, scientific, medical[edit]
The ISM bands were initially reserved for non-communications uses of RF energy, such as microwave ovens, radio-frequency heating, and similar purposes. However, in recent years the largest use of these bands has been by short-range low-power communications systems, since users do not have to hold a radio operator's license. Cordless telephones, wireless computer networks, Bluetooth devices, and garage door openers all use the ISM bands. ISM devices do not have regulatory protection against interference from other users of the band.
Land mobile bands[edit]
Bands of frequency, especially in the   and  parts of the spectrum, are allocated for communication between fixed base stations and land mobile vehicle-mounted or portable transceivers. In the United States these services are informally known as business band radio. See also Professional mobile radio.
Police radio and other public safety services such as fire departments and ambulances are generally found in the   and  parts of the spectrum. Trunking systems are often used to make most efficient use of the limited number of frequency available.
The demand for mobile telephone service has led to large blocks of radio spectrum allocated to cellular frequency.
Radio control[edit]
Reliable radio control uses bands dedicated to the purpose. Radio-controlled toys may use portions of unlicensed spectrum in the 27  or 49  bands, but more costly aircraft, boat, or land vehicle models use dedicated radio control frequency near 72  to avoid interference by unlicensed uses. The 21st century has seen a move to 2.4 gigahertz spread spectrum RC control systems.
Licensed amateur radio operators use portions of the 6-meter band in North America. Industrial remote control of cranes or railway locomotives use assigned frequency that vary by area.
Radar
Radar applications use relatively high power pulse transmitters and sensitive receivers, so radar is operated on bands not used for other purposes. Most radar bands are in the microwave part of the spectrum, although certain important applications for meteorology make use of powerful transmitters in the  band. Radio waves are a type of electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths in the electromagnetic spectrum longer than infrared light. Radio waves have frequency as high as 300   to as low as 3 , though some definitions describe waves above 1 or 3   as microwaves, or include waves of any lower frequency. At 300  , the corresponding wavelength is 1 mm (0.039 in), and at 3  is 100 km (62 mi). Like all other electromagnetic waves, they travel at the speed of light. Naturally occurring radio waves are generated by lightning, or by astronomical objects.
Artificially generated radio waves are used for fixed and mobile radio communication, broadcasting, radar and other navigation systems, communications satellites, computer networks and innumerable other applications. Radio waves are generated by radio transmitters and received by radio receivers. Different frequency of radio waves have different propagation characteristics in the Earth's atmosphere; long waves can diffract around obstacles like mountains and follow the contour of the earth (ground waves), shorter waves can reflect off the ionosphere and return to earth beyond the horizon (skywaves), while much shorter wavelengths bend or diffract very little and travel on a line of sight, so their propagation distances are limited to the visual horizon.
To prevent interference between different users, the artificial generation and use of radio waves is strictly regulated by law, coordinated by an international body called the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), which defines radio waves as "electromagnetic waves of frequency arbitrarily lower than 3 000  , propagated in space without artificial guide".[1] The radio spectrum is divided into a number of radio bands on the basis of frequency, allocated to different uses.

The bands and frequencies below are derived from multiple sources, and different radios may have different frequency numbers. Most international broadcasters use amplitude modulation with 5 kHz steps between channels; a few use single sideband modulation.[1] The World Radiocommunication Conference (WRC), organized under the auspices of the International Telecommunication Union, allocates bands for various services in periodic conferences. The most recent WRC took place in 2012. At WRC-97 in 1997, the following bands were allocated for international broadcasting.


