66 Secondary Energy Infobook
The U.S. Department of Energy divides the way we use energy into
categories—residential, commercial, industrial, electric power, and
transportation. These are called sectors of the economy.
Residential and Commercial Sector
The residential and commercial sector—homes and buildings—
consumes 11.62 percent of the energy used in the United States today.
We use energy to heat and cool our homes and buildings, to light them,
and to operate appliances and office machines. In the last 40 years,
Americans have significantly reduced the amount of energy we use to
perform these tasks, mostly through technological improvements in the
systems we use, as well as in the manufacturing processes to make those
systems.
Heating and Cooling
The ability to maintain desired temperatures is one of the most
important accomplishments of modern technology. Our ovens,
freezers, and homes can be kept at any temperature we choose, a
luxury that wasn’t possible 100 years ago.
Keeping our living and working spaces at comfortable temperatures
provides a healthier environment, but uses a lot of energy. Forty-eight
percent of the average home’s energy consumption is for heating and
cooling rooms.
The three fuels used most often for heating are natural gas, electricity,
and heating oil. Today, about half of the nation’s homes are heated
by natural gas, a trend that will continue, at least in the near future.
Natural gas is a clean-burning fuel. Most natural gas furnaces used in
the 1970s and 1980s were about 60 percent efficient—they converted
60 percent of the energy in the natural gas into usable heat. Some of
these furnaces might still be in use today. Depending on maintenance
and homeowner use, these furnaces could last for over 20 years.
New furnaces manufactured today can reach efficiency ratings of 98
percent, since they are designed to capture heat that used to be lost
up the chimney. These furnaces are more complex and costly, but they
save significant amounts of energy.
The payback period for a new high-efficiency furnace is between four
and five years, resulting in considerable savings over the life of the
furnace. Payback period is the amount of time a consumer must use
a system before beginning to benefit from the energy savings because
of the higher initial investment cost.
Electricity is the second leading source of energy for home heating and
provides almost all of the energy used for air conditioning. The efficiency
of air conditioners and heat pumps has increased 50 percent in the last
35 years.
In the 1970s, air conditioners and heat pumps had an average Seasonal
Energy Efficiency Ratio, or SEER, of 7.0. Today, the new units must have
a SEER of 13, and high-efficiency units are available with SEER ratings as
high as 18. These highly-rated units are more expensive to buy, but their
payback period is only three to five years.
OFF
Energy Consumption
Heating oil is the third leading fuel for home heating and is widely used
in northeastern states. In 1973, the average home used 1,294 gallons of
oil a year. Today, that figure is around 550 gallons, an almost 60 percent
decrease.
This decrease in consumption is a result of improvements in oil furnaces.
Not only do today’s burners operate more efficiently, they also burn
more cleanly. According to the Environmental Protection Agency, new
oil furnaces operate as cleanly as natural gas and propane burners. A
new technology under development would use PV cells to convert the
bright, white oil burner flame into electricity.
Saving Energy on Heating and Cooling
The four most important things a consumer can do to reduce heating
and cooling costs are:
? Maintenance
Maintaining equipment in good working order is essential to reducing
energy costs. A certified technician should service systems annually,
and filters should be cleaned or replaced on a regular schedule by the
homeowner.
? Programmable Thermostats
Programmable thermostats regulate indoor air temperature
automatically, adjusting for time of day and season. They can be used
with both heating and cooling systems and can lower energy usage
appreciably.
? Insulation
Most heat enters and escapes from homes through the ceilings and
walls. Adequate insulation is very important to reduce heat loss and air
infiltration. The amount of insulation required varies with the climate of
the region in which the house is located.
? Caulking and Weather Stripping
Preventing the exchange of inside air with outside air is very important.
Weather stripping and caulking around doors and windows can
significantly reduce air leakage. Keeping windows and doors closed
when systems are operating is also a necessity.
District Energy Systems
Where there are many buildings close together, like on a college campus,
it is sometimes more efficient to have a central heating and cooling
facility, which is called a district energy system. A district system can
reduce equipment and maintenance costs, as well as produce energy
savings.
If the system relies on a fossil fuel cogeneration plant for heat, the overall
efficiency of the plant can increase from 35 to 80 percent. Cogeneration
can also reduce emissions per unit of energy produced by 50 percent.
If the district energy system uses a renewable energy source, such as
geothermal energy or waste heat, emission levels can be reduced even
more. A major benefit of district heating is its ability to use materials as
fuel that would otherwise be waste products. These fuels may include
biomass, such as waste from the forest product industry, straw, garbage,
industrial waste heat, and treated sewage. 
© 2016 The NEED Project 8408 Kao Circle, Manassas, VA 20110 1.800.875.5029 www.NEED.org 67
Energy Consumption
Geoexchange Systems
There are only a few areas in the country that have high temperature
geothermal reservoirs, but low temperature geothermal resources are
everywhere. Geothermal heat pumps, or geoexchange units as they
are often called, can use low temperature geothermal energy to heat
and cool buildings.
Geothermal systems cost more to install than conventional systems,
but over the life of the system, they can save a significant amount of
money and energy. They can reduce heating costs by 30-70 percent
and cooling costs by 20-50 percent. Until 2016, there is a federal tax
credit of up to 30 percent of the cost of the system. Today, there are
more than one million geothermal systems in homes and buildings.
Building Design
The placement, design, and construction materials used can affect the
energy efficiency of homes and buildings. Making optimum use of the
light and heat from the sun is becoming more prevalent, especially in
commercial buildings.
Many new buildings are situated with maximum exposure to the sun,
incorporating large, south-facing windows to capture the energy in
winter, and overhangs to shade the windows from the sun in summer.
Windows are also strategically placed around the buildings to make use
of natural light, reducing the need for artificial lighting during the day.
Using materials that can absorb and store heat can also contribute to
the energy efficiency of buildings.
The Department of Energy’s National Renewable Energy Lab has
developed computer programs to design energy efficient buildings
for any area of the country, taking into account the local climate and
availability of building materials.
For existing houses and buildings, there are many ways to increase
efficiency. Adding insulation and replacing windows and doors with
high efficiency models can significantly reduce energy costs. Adding
insulated draperies and blinds, and using them wisely, can also result
in savings. Even planting trees that provide shade in the summer and
allow light in during the winter can make a big difference.
Lighting
Lighting is essential to a modern society. Lights have revolutionized the
way we live, work, and play. Lighting accounts for about five percent
of the average home’s total energy bills, but for stores, schools, and
businesses, the figure is slightly higher. On average, the commercial
sector uses between 9 and 10 percent of its energy for lighting.
Some homes still use the traditional incandescent light bulbs
invented by Thomas Edison. These bulbs convert only 10 percent of the
electricity they use to produce light; the other 90 percent is converted
into heat. With new technologies, such as better filament designs and
gas mixtures, these bulbs are more efficient than they used to be. In
1879, the average bulb produced 14 lumens per watt, compared to up
to 17 lumens per watt today. By adding halogen gases, this efficiency
can be increased to 22 lumens per watt. Energy-wasting, traditional
incandescents have been phased out, beginning in 2012 with the
100-watt and 75-watt bulbs. 60-watt and 40-watt incandescent bulbs
followed and were phased out in 2014. Halogen and energy efficient
varieties of incandescents are still available for consumers.
Compact fluorescent light bulbs (CFL) are more common in homes
now. They last up to ten times longer than incandescents and use much
less energy, producing significant savings over the life of the bulb. New
fluorescent bulb technology has made more dramatic advances in
lighting efficiency. Some of the new fluorescent systems have increased
the efficiency of these bulbs to as high as 70 lumens per watt.
Most commercial buildings have converted to linear fluorescent lighting,
which costs more to install, but uses much less energy to produce the same
amount of light. Buildings with fluorescent lighting already installed can
lower lighting costs by updating to more efficient fluorescent systems.
Light emitting diodes (LED) are another efficient lighting choice. Even
more efficient than CFLs, these bulbs last two and a half times longer
than CFLs and have many tech-friendly applications. However, CFL and
LED bulbs are the more expensive bulbs on the market.
Most light bulbs are used in some kind of fixture. The design of fixtures
can have a major impact on the amount of light required in buildings.
Good fixture designs that capture all of the light produced and direct it
to where it is needed can reduce energy costs significantly.
VERTICAL LOOP HORIZONTAL LOOP
Deep Underground Pipes
Shallow Underground Pipes
Residential Geoexchange Units
Supply
Return
Individual Units
Heat
Source
District Heating System
22 Today’s Ecient
Halogen Incandescent
Today’s CFL 70
Today’s LED 100
y 70
y’s LED 100
Today’s Fluorescent 110
1879 Incandescent MAXIMUM LUMENS PER WATT
22 cient
descent
y’s CFL
descent 14 MAXIMU
Lighting Eciency
Data: Madison Gas and Electric
68 Secondary Energy Infobook
Outdoor lighting consumes a lot of energy, too. Most of our major
highways and residential streets have streetlights, as well as many
parking lots. In the 1970s, most streetlights were inefficient incandescent
and mercury vapor lights. It was at this time that the Federal Government
began replacing these lights with high-pressure sodium lights, which
produce about three times as much light per watt. Automatic sensors
were also installed to reduce energy use.
Consumers should make use of fluorescent bulbs wherever feasible and
use only the amount of light they need for the task at hand. Automatic
turn-off and dimmer switches can also contribute to energy savings.
Keeping light bulbs free of dust is an energy-saver, too. Some of the most
important actions consumers can take is to turn off lights they aren’t
using, buy lamps that are suited to their needs in different rooms, and
make energy conservation a priority in their daily lives. After CFLs have
completed their lifespan, they can be recycled.
Appliances
In the last 100 years, appliances have revolutionized the way we spend
our time at home. Tasks that used to take hours are now accomplished
in minutes, using electricity most of the time instead of human energy.
In 1990, Congress passed the National Appliance Energy Conservation
Act, which requires appliances to meet strict energy efficiency standards.
? Water Heating
Heating water uses more energy than any other task, except for home
heating and cooling. Most water heaters use natural gas or electricity
as fuel. New water heaters are much more energy efficient than earlier
models. Many now have timers that can be set to the times when hot
water is needed, so that energy is not being used 24 hours a day. New
systems on the market combine high efficiency water heaters and
furnaces into one unit to share heating responsibilities. Combination
systems can produce a 90 percent efficiency rating.
In the future, expect to see water heaters that utilize heat that is usually
pumped outside as waste heat. Systems will collect the waste heat and
direct it into the water heater, resulting in efficiency ratings three times
those of conventional water heaters.
Most consumers set the temperature on their water heaters much
too high. Lowering the temperature setting can result in significant
energy savings. Limiting the amount of hot water usage with low-flow
showerheads and conservation behaviors also contributes to lower
energy bills.
? Refrigerators
Refrigerators have changed the way we live and have brought health
benefits to our lives. With these appliances, we can safely store foods for
long periods of time. Since refrigerators involve heat exchange, they also
consume a significant amount of electricity each year.
New refrigerators are many times more efficient than early models.
Manufacturers have improved the insulation and the seals, or gaskets,
to hold in the cold air better. The industry has also made technological
advances in defrost systems, as well as in more energy efficient motors
and compressors.
The appliance industry has worked with the chemical industry to
develop refrigerants that are not harmful to the ozone layer, as the early
CFCs were. As with all appliances, the most efficient models are more
expensive to purchase but produce energy savings over the life of the
refrigerator.
? Washers and Dryers
Before washers and dryers, doing the laundry meant hard physical work
all day, no matter what the weather. Today, the most difficult thing about
laundry is deciding which cycle to use. Today’s machines have many
innovations that save energy. Dryers with automatic sensors can tell
when clothes are dry.
High-efficiency washing machines are being designed with either a
horizontal axis or the traditional top-load design. These machines use
35 percent less water and 20 percent less energy than a regular washer.
They also have higher capacity; they can wash large items such as
comforters and sleeping bags.
? Appliance Efficiency Ratings
We use many other appliances every day. Some use less than 10 cents
worth of electricity a year, while others use much more. Have you
noticed that those appliances that produce or remove heat require the
most energy?
When purchasing any appliance, consumers should define their needs
and pay attention to the Energy Efficiency Ratio (EER) included on the
yellow label of every appliance. The EER allows consumers to compare
not just purchase price, but operating cost as well, to determine which
appliance is the best investment.
Usually, more energy efficient appliances cost more to buy, but result
in significant energy savings over the life of the appliance. Buying the
cheapest appliance is rarely a bargain in the long run.
In the next few years, consumers will have the choice of many smart
appliances that incorporate computer chip technology to operate more
efficiently, accurately, and effectively.
OFF
Energy Consumption
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500 kWh per year
REFRIGERATORS
MADE BEFORE 1980
2014 ENERGY STAR®
QUALIFIED
REFRIGERATORS
2,215 kWh
Data: ENERGY STAR®
420 kWh
Refrigerator Eciency
© 2016 The NEED Project 8408 Kao Circle, Manassas, VA 20110 1.800.875.5029 www.NEED.org 69
The United States is a highly industrialized society. We use a lot of
energy. Industry consumed 21.72 percent of the energy in 2014, but
U.S. industry produces about 20 percent of the world’s manufacturing
output. Advanced technologies have allowed industry to do more
with less. Industry has also been a leader in developing cogeneration
technology. Cogenerators produce electricity and use the waste heat
for manufacturing, increasing overall energy efficiency by 35 percent.
Every industry uses energy, but there are six energy-intensive industries
that use the majority of the energy consumed by the industrial sector.
Petroleum Refining
Refineries need energy to convert crude oil into transportation fuels,
heating fuels, chemicals, and other products. Enormous amounts of
heat are required to separate crude oil into its components, such as
gasoline, diesel, aviation fuel, and important gases. Heat is also needed
to crack, or break, big hydrogen and carbon molecules into lighter,
more valuable petroleum products.
Refineries use a mixture of fuels to operate, including by-product
gases made during the refining process. On a per barrel basis, today’s
refineries use about 30 percent less energy than they did in the 1970s.
Steel Manufacturing
The steel industry consumes about two percent of total U.S. energy
demand. The energy is used to convert iron ore and scrap metal into
hundreds of products we use daily. The cost of energy represents 15
percent of the manufacturing cost of steel. Most of this energy comes
directly from the heating of coal, and natural gas, and also from
electricity generated by coal or natural gas plants.
Since 1990, the steel industry has reduced its energy consumption
by 30 percent per ton of steel. This increase in efficiency has been
accomplished through advanced technologies, the closing of older
plants, and the increased use of recycled steel.
The increased use of recycled steel also saves energy. It requires 75
percent less energy to recycle steel than to make it from iron ore. Today,
steel is one of the nation’s leading recycled products, with two-thirds of
new steel being manufactured from recycled scrap.
Aluminum Manufacturing
It takes huge amounts of electricity to make aluminum from bauxite,
or aluminum ore. It requires six to seven kilowatt-hours of electricity
to convert bauxite into one pound of aluminum. The cost of electricity
accounts for one-third of the total manufacturing cost.
Today, it requires 20 percent less energy to produce a pound of
aluminum than it did 20 years ago, mostly because of the growth of
recycling. Aluminum recycling has grown substantially over the last 4
decades. Using recycled aluminum requires 95 percent less energy than
converting bauxite into aluminum.
Paper Manufacturing
The U.S. uses enormous amounts of paper every day and energy is
required in every step of the papermaking process. Energy is used to
chip, grind, and cook the wood into pulp, and more is needed to roll
and dry the pulp into paper. Paper and paper products manufacturing
is the third largest energy consumer in the industrial sector.
The pulp and paper industry has reduced its fossil fuel consumption per
ton of paper by about 30 percent in the last 20 years, mostly through the
use of better technology and cogeneration systems. Over 63 percent of
the fuel the industry uses to power the cogeneration equipment comes
from wood waste, a renewable energy source.
Chemical Manufacturing
Chemicals are essential to our way of life. We use chemicals in our
medicines, cleaning products, fertilizers, and plastics, as well as in many
of our foods. The chemical industry uses natural gas, coal, and oil to
power the equipment they use to manufacture chemicals. Chemical
manufacturing also needs a hydrocarbon source of raw materials, or
feedstock, to process into chemical products. Petroleum, propane,
and natural gas are the major feedstocks.
Improved technology has made the chemical industry about 50 percent
more energy efficient today than it was 30-40 years ago. Technology
has allowed the industry to use less energy, as well as produce more
product from an equivalent amount of feedstock.
Cement Manufacturing
Some people think the United States is becoming a nation of concrete.
New roads and buildings are being built everywhere, every day.
Concrete is made from cement, water, and crushed stone. Making
cement is an energy-intensive industry because of the extremely high
temperatures required—up to 3,400 degrees Fahrenheit (more than
2,000o
C).
Thirty years ago, cement plants all burned fossil fuels to produce this
heat. Today, the industry has reduced its energy consumption by more
than one-third using innovative waste-to-energy programs.
Nearly 70 percent of the cement plants in the U.S. now use some type
of waste by-product for fuel, including used printing inks, dry cleaning
fluids, and used tires—all of which have high energy content. One
pound of used tires, for example, has more energy than one pound of
coal.
Today, a modern cement plant can meet between 20 and 70 percent of
its energy needs by burning waste materials that otherwise would not
be used for their energy value.
PETROLEUM REFINERY Industrial Sector
Photo courtesy of BP
70 Secondary Energy Infobook
America is a nation on the move. Almost 28 percent of the energy we use
every day goes to transporting people and goods from one place to another.
The Automobile
The people in the United States have always had a love affair with the
automobile. Until the oil embargoes of the 1970s, Americans drove
without thought of fuel economy or environmental impacts.
In 1973, there were 125 million vehicles on the road, driving an average
of 10,000 miles a year. Today, there are more than 250 million vehicles,
driving 11,300 miles a year. Even with the scares of the oil embargoes,
political unrest in oil-producing areas, and damaging storms in the Gulf
of Mexico, we are driving more cars, more miles. It’s a good thing we’re
doing it more efficiently and cleanly.
Although the oil crises didn’t alter Americans’ driving habits much, they
did bring about changes in vehicle design. Automakers downsized many
large and mid-sized models and significantly reduced vehicle weight.
Aerodynamic designs were incorporated and engine size reduced. More
important, engines were improved to increase fuel efficiency with fuel
injectors and electronic transmissions. All of these improvements have
resulted in almost doubling the fuel efficiency for vehicles since the
1970s.
? Mileage Requirements
Most of the improvements in automobile efficiency have been the
result of mandates by the Federal Government such as CAFE standards.
First enacted by Congress in 1965, the purpose of Corporate Average
Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards is to reduce energy consumption by
increasing the fuel economy of cars and light trucks. The National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) sets fuel economy standards
for cars and light trucks sold in the U.S., while the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) calculates the average fuel economy for each
manufacturer. Today, passenger cars are required to achieve a combined
city and highway mileage of 36.4 miles per gallon (mpg).
When gas prices were low, consumers made no great effort to buy fuelefficient
vehicles. In 2004, for example, sales of the ten most efficient cars
and ten most efficient trucks totaled less than one percent of total sales.
On the other hand, sport utility vehicles (SUVs) and light trucks made up
half of total passenger vehicle sales.
Many car manufacturers are producing hybrid vehicles powered by a
combination of gasoline and electricity. These vehicles are much more
fuel efficient than their gasoline-only counterparts because they are
designed to run on only electricity during periods of low power demand.
In many states, commuters driving hybrid vehicles are allowed in limited
access lanes and are given tax deductions.
NHTSA has proposed CAFE standards for 2017-2025 for passenger
cars and light trucks (including subcompact cars, large sedans, station
wagons, crossover utility vehicles, SUVs, minivans, and pickup trucks).
The proposed standards require over 41.0 miles per gallon in model year
2021, and 54.5 mpg in model year 2025.
As the nation’s automakers re-invent themselves, energy efficiency is a
major consideration of future auto makes and models.
? Alternative Fuels
There is also a push to develop vehicles that run on fuels other than
petroleum products or on blended fuels. Today, there are vehicles that
run on electricity, natural gas, propane, biodiesel, ethanol, and hydrogen.
In the 1970s, there were only a few vehicles that ran on alternative fuels.
Today, there are more than one million alternative fuel vehicles in the
United States. That number will continue to increase as barriers to
acceptance across the nation are overcome. These include:
Refueling Infrastructure: Manufacturers are now capable of producing
a large volume of alternative fuel vehicles, but there needs to be a
convenient infrastructure for obtaining the fuels. Not many people are
willing to drive 15 miles or more to refuel.
OFF
Energy Consumption
Transportation Sector
30
15
 0
Miles per Gallon
1980 1990 2000 2010
60
2025
*By 2025 new model cars and light trucks will have to meet a 54.5 mpg fuel
economy standard.
1973
Average Fuel Economy of New Passenger Cars
Data: U.S. Department of Energy
13.4
24.3 28.0 28.5
35.5
54.5*
45
Alternative Fuel Fleet Vehicles in Use Since 1992
0
50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
300,000
350,000
400,000
450,000
500,000
Vehicles
‘92 ‘93 ‘94 ‘95 ‘96 ‘97 ‘98 ‘99 ‘00 ‘01 ‘02 ‘03 ‘04 ‘05 ‘06 ‘07 ‘08 ‘09
CNG
Propane
LNG Hydrogen
Ethanol (E85)
Electric
Data: Energy Information Administration
‘10
600,000
700,000
© 2016 The NEED Project 8408 Kao Circle, Manassas, VA 20110 1.800.875.5029 www.NEED.org 71
Consumer Education: Most Americans know very little about
alternative fuel vehicles. Consumers must be educated about
environmental and other benefits of these vehicles before they will
consider them a choice.
If these barriers can be removed, alternative fuel vehicles can develop a
strong niche market in the U.S. New technologies are being developed
to make these vehicles more practical and convenient for consumers.
Commercial Transportation
The United States is a large country. We use a lot of energy moving
goods and groups of people from one place to another. Passenger
vehicles consume about 60% of the transportation fuel and commercial
vehicles consume the remaining 40%. The fuel efficiency of trains,
trucks, buses, and planes has increased significantly in the last 40 years,
as well as the number of miles traveled.
? Trucks
Trucks use more transportation fuel than any other commercial vehicle.
Almost all products are at some point transported by truck. In the
early 1970s, the average tractor-trailer traveled 5.5 miles on a gallon
of fuel. New trucks manufactured today can travel about seven miles
on a gallon of fuel. This increase in fuel efficiency is due mainly to
improvements in engine design and computerized electronic controls.
New diesel engines can convert about 45 percent of the energy in
the fuel into vehicle movement, while gasoline engines can convert
only about 30 percent. Federal research is aimed at improving diesel
efficiency to 55 percent, by redesigning engines, redesigning braking
systems to use air flow to help slow down vehicles, and engineering
tires to roll more easily.
? Planes
Since 1980, the number of passengers on planes has more than
doubled. Planes all use petroleum products for fuel, which is the largest
cost item for air transport after labor. The airline industry has been a
leader in efficiency.
Since the 1970s, airlines have increased their fuel efficiency 70
percent. Many factors have led to better efficiency—newer engines,
better flight routing, single engine taxiing, and design modifications.
Boeing’s newest plane, the 787 Dreamliner, is touted to be 20
percent more efficient than comparable sized planes by using new
engines, lighter weight materials, improvements in aerodynamics,
and other engineering advances. The International Air Transport
Association has set a goal of improving fuel efficiency another
25 percent by 2020.
Airlines are also considering alternative fuels for airplanes. Airbus flew
an A380 with one engine powered by a gas-to-liquid fuel in 2008.
The same year Virgin Atlantic flew a Boeing 747-400 with one engine
operating on a 20 percent biofuel blend. In 2009, Continental Airlines
conducted a successful Boeing 737 test flight using jet fuel blended
with algae oil and jatropha. Other airlines have been running similar
tests, mixing biofuels with jet fuel. In 2010, the U.S. Navy flew an
F/A-18 fighter jet on a 50/50 jet fuel/biofuel blend. These tests have
demonstrated that biofuels can be blended with existing fuels and
not impact an airplane’s performance. United Airlines will begin flights
using biojet fuel in 2016.
? Railroads
Since the 1970s, the fuel efficiency of freight trains has increased by
more than half. This reduction in energy use was accomplished by
using longer trains with less handling and fewer changes and stops. The
equipment is stronger and lighter to handle more cargo. There have
also been major improvements in rail technology that have contributed
to ease of movement.
The trucking and marine shipping industries work with the railroad
industry to move cargo efficiently. More freight is being transported on
trains directly in truck trailers and uniform containers so that there is
less handling. Today, containers often travel by ship, rail, and truck in
one shipment called multi-mode or intermodal transportation.
In the future, there will be an increase in the use of AC motors on
diesel electric engines on locomotives. With AC motors, there are fewer
moving parts, so less heat is generated, resulting in more efficient use
of fuel. A train that today requires six locomotives might require only
four with this new technology.
? Mass Transit: Public Transportation
Mass transit is the system of public transportation for moving people
on buses, trains, light rail, and subways. In 1970, nine percent of workers
who traveled to work used public transit systems, two-thirds on buses.
Today, only five percent of commuters use public transportation, half
on buses. Why this decrease? Americans love cars. Most families own
more than one. As more people have moved from cities into suburbs,
public transportation has not been economically feasible for many
dispersed locations.
The average American spends 42 hours each year delayed by traffic
congestion. Building more roads isn’t the only answer, especially with
environmental concerns over vehicle emissions and the higher cost of
transportation fuels.
U.S. Freight, by Mode of Transportation, 2013
* Multi-mode includes any combination of truck, rail, air, and waterway.
Data: Bureau of Transportation Statistics
Truck
Rail
Waterways
Air
Multi-mode*
8,060.2
1,628.5
576.0
4.8
357.0
8,060.2
MILLIONS OF TONS PER YEAR