Bitter is the most sensitive of the tastes, and many perceive it as unpleasant, sharp, or disagreeable, but it is sometimes desirable and intentionally added via various bitter agents. Common bitter foods and beverages include coffee, unsweetened cocoa, South American mate, bitter gourd, olives, citrus peel, many plants in the Brassicaceae family, dandelion greens, wild chicory, and escarole. The ethanol in alcoholic beverages tastes bitter,[28] as do the additional bitter ingredients found in some alcoholic beverages including hops in beer and orange in bitters. Quinine is also known for its bitter taste and is found in tonic water.
Bitter is of interest to those who study evolution, as well as various health researchers[21][29] since a large number of natural bitter compounds are known to be toxic. The ability to detect bitter-tasting, toxic compounds at low thresholds is considered to provide an important protective function.[21][29][30] Plant leaves often contain toxic compounds, yet even amongst leaf-eating primates, there is a tendency to prefer immature leaves, which tend to be higher in protein and lower in fiber and poisons than mature leaves.[31] Amongst humans, various food processing techniques are used worldwide to detoxify otherwise inedible foods and make them palatable.[32] Furthermore, the use of fire, changes in diet, and avoidance of toxins has led to neutral evolution in human bitter sensitivity. This has allowed several loss of function mutations that has led to a reduced sensory capacity towards bitter in humans when compared to other species.[33]
The threshold for stimulation of bitter taste by quinine averages a concentration of 8 ?M (8 micromolar).[21] The taste thresholds of other bitter substances are rated relative to quinine, which is thus given a reference index of 1.[21][22] For example, Brucine has an index of 11, is thus perceived as intensely more bitter than quinine, and is detected at a much lower solution threshold.[21] The most bitter substance known is the synthetic chemical denatonium, which has an index of 1,000.[22] It is used as an aversive agent (a bitterant) that is added to toxic substances to prevent accidental ingestion. This was discovered in 1958 during research on lignocaine, a local anesthetic, by MacFarlan Smith of Gorgie, Edinburgh, Scotland.[citation needed]
Research has shown that TAS2Rs (taste receptors, type 2, also known as T2Rs) such as TAS2R38 coupled to the G proteingustducin are responsible for the human ability to taste bitter substances.[34] They are identified not only by their ability to taste for certain "bitter" ligands, but also by the morphology of the receptor itself (surface bound, monomeric).[35] The TAS2R family in humans is thought to comprise about 25 different taste receptors, some of which can recognize a wide variety of bitter-tasting compounds.[36] Over 550 bitter-tasting compounds have been identified, on a bitter database, of which about 100 have been assigned to one or more specific receptors.[37] Recently it is speculated that the selective constraints on the TAS2R family have been weakened due to the relatively high rate of mutation and pseudogenization.[38] Researchers use two synthetic substances, phenylthiocarbamide (PTC) and 6-n-propylthiouracil (PROP) to study the genetics of bitter perception.
A bitter taste in your mouth can be caused by a number of conditions ranging from poor dental hygiene to digestive problems and lifestyle choices. Sometimes the bad taste in your mouth can be a side effect of some medications. Also, smoking interferes with your taste buds and can leave you with a constant unpleasant taste in your mouth. 
Poor oral hygiene
Poor oral hygiene can be a reason for having a bitter taste in your mouth. The bad taste can become worse depending on what you eat and if you smoke or not. Regularly brushing and flossing teeth helps to remove bacteria from between teeth and around the gums and prevent gum disease.
According to dentist Dr. Alfred D. Wyatt Jr., a persistent bad taste in your mouth could be a sign of gum disease. This occurs when bacteria in the mouth build up and cause plaque to form. If this is not treated properly, it can affect your gums and jawbone.3 The first sign of gum disease is inflamed gums that bleed easily.
The bitter taste in your mouth could also come from bacteria that forms under dental appliances that don’t fit properly.
The persistent perception of bitter taste developed as an early symptom of the disease in our patients. In this regard, it resembles the dysgeusia known from ciguatera food poisoning, which is thought to produce a bitter taste by blocking sodium channels.1 However, other sensory symptoms were absent, both clinically and electrophysiologically. The chorda tympani branch of the facial nerve carries taste sensations from the anterior two thirds of the tongue, whereas the glossopharyngeal nerve and the vagus nerve innervate the posterior third and the epiglottis. It has been shown experimentally and clinically that anaesthesia of the chorda tympani nerve branch results in intensified perception of bitter taste from the posterior tongue, suggesting that input by way of the chorda tympani normally inhibits the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerve input.2 In fact, spontaneous bitter taste dysgeusia (phantogeusia) similar to that perceived by our patients was observed in the posterior tongue after anaesthesia of the chorda tympani.2 Hence it may be speculated that mild sensory neuropathy of the chorda tympani branches may be responsible for our findings. Sensory signs have indeed been described in ALS. However, if at all, they develop relatively late in the disease.3 Furthermore, the spatial gustatory function test did not reveal hypogeusia confined to a localised region of the tongue in our patients, although the sensitivity of this test for mild gustatory disturbances is probably low.4 Unfortunately, neither patient was available for electrogustometry to further clarify our hypothesis.
