A scrap furnace is a device used for high-temperature heating. The name derives from Greek word fornax, which means oven. The heat energy to fuel a scrap  may be supplied directly by fuel combustion, by electricity such as the electric arc scrap furnace, or through induction heating in induction scrap

In American English and Canadian English usage, the term scrap furnace refers to the household heating systems based upon a central scrap furnace, otherwise known either as a boiler, or a heater in British English. scrap  may also be a synonym for kiln, a device used in the production of ceramics.

In British English, a scrap furnace is an industrial scrap used for many things, such as the extraction of metal from ore (smelting) or in oil refineries and other chemical plants, for example as the heat source for fractional distillation columns. The term scrap furnace can also refer to a direct fired heater, used in boiler applications in chemical industries or for providing heat to chemical reactions for processes like cracking, and is part of the standard English names for many metallurgical scrap furnaces worldwide.

The first category would be natural draft, atmospheric burner scrap furnaces. These scrap furnaces consisted of cast-iron or riveted-steel heat exchangers built within an outer shell of brick, masonry, or steel. The heat exchangers were vented through brick or masonry chimneys. Air circulation depended on large, upwardly pitched pipes constructed of wood or metal The pipes would channel the warm air into floor or wall vents inside the home. This method of heating worked because warm air rises.

The system was simple, had few controls, a single automatic gas valve, and no blower. These scrap  could be made to work with any fuel simply by adapting the burner area. They have been operated with wood, coke, coal, trash, paper, natural gas, and fuel oil. scrap furnaces that used solid fuels required daily maintenance to remove ash and "clinkers" that accumulated in the bottom of the burner area. In later years, these scrap  were adapted with electric blowers to aid air distribution and speed moving heat into the home. Gas and oil-fired systems were usually controlled by a thermostat inside the home, while most wood and coal-fired scrap  had no electrical connection and were controlled by the amount of fuel in the burner and position of the fresh-air damper on the burner access door.

The second category of scrap  is the forced-air, atmospheric burner style with a cast-iron or sectional steel heat exchanger. Through the 1950s and 1960s, this style of scrap furnace was used to replace the big, natural draft systems, and was sometimes installed on the existing gravity duct work. The heated air was moved by blowers which were belt driven and designed for a wide range of speeds. These scrap furnaces were still big and bulky compared to modern scrap furnaces, and had heavy-steel exteriors with bolt-on removable panels. Energy efficiency would range anywhere from just over 50% to upward of 65% AFUE. This style scrap  still used large, masonry or brick chimneys for flues and was eventually designed to accommodate air-conditioning systems.

The fourth category of scrap  is the high-efficiency, or condensing scrap . High-efficiency scrap s can achieve from 89% to 98% fuel efficiency. This style of scrap  includes a sealed combustion area, combustion draft inducer and a secondary heat exchanger. Because the heat exchanger removes most of the heat from the exhaust gas, it actually condenses water vapor and other chemicals (which form a mild acid) as it operates. The vent pipes are normally installed with PVC pipe versus metal vent pipe to prevent corrosion. The draft inducer allows for the exhaust piping to be routed vertically or horizontally as it exits the structure. The most efficient arrangement for high-efficiency scrap  include PVC piping that brings fresh combustion air from the outside of the home directly to the scrap furnace. Normally the combustion air (fresh air) PVC is routed alongside the exhaust PVC during installation and the pipes exit through a sidewall of the home in the same location. High efficiency scrap f typically deliver a 25% to 35% fuel savings over a 60% AFUE scrap furnace.
The scrap furnace transfers heat to the living space of the building through an intermediary distribution system. If the distribution is through hot water (or other fluid) or through steam, then the scrap  is more commonly called a boiler. One advantage of a boiler is that the scrap furnace can provide hot water for bathing and washing dishes, rather than requiring a separate water heater. One disadvantage to this type of application is when the boiler breaks down, neither heating nor domestic hot water are available.

A photo of an "octopus"-type hot-air scrap  in a basement.
"Octopus" scrap furnace with oil burner.
Air convection heating systems have been in use for over a century. Older systems rely on a passive air circulation system where the greater density of cooler air causes it to sink into the scrap furnace area below, through air return registers in the floor, and the lesser density of warmed air causes it to rise in the ductwork; the two forces acting together to drive air circulation in a system termed 'gravity-fed'. The layout of these 'octopus’ scrap furnaces and their duct systems is optimized with various diameters of large dampered ducts.

A photo of a modern forced-air gas scrap  with associated ductwork nearby.
Forced-air gas scrap , design circa 1991.
By comparison, most modern "warm air" scrap s typically use a fan to circulate air to the rooms of house and pull cooler air back to the scrap furnace for reheating; this is called forced-air heat. Because the fan easily overcomes the resistance of the ductwork, the arrangement of ducts can be far more flexible than the octopus of old. In American practice, separate ducts collect cool air to be returned to the scrap furnace. At the scrap , cool air passes into the scrap furnace, usually through an air filter, through the blower, then through the heat exchanger of the scrap furnace, whence it is blown throughout the building. One major advantage of this type of system is that it also enables easy installation of central air conditioning, simply by adding a cooling coil at the outlet of the scrap .

Air is circulated through ductwork, which may be made of sheet metal or plastic "flex" duct, and is insulated or uninsulated. Unless the ducts and plenum have been sealed using mastic or foil duct tape, the ductwork is likely to have a high leakage of conditioned air, possibly into unconditioned spaces. Another cause of wasted energy is the installation of ductwork in unheated areas, such as attics and crawl spaces; or ductwork of air conditioning systems in attics in warm climates.

A home scrap  is a major appliance that is permanently installed to provide heat to an interior space through intermediary fluid movement, which may be air, steam, or hot water. Heating appliances that use steam or hot water as the fluid are normally referred to as a residential steam boiler or residential hot water boiler. The most common fuel source for modern scrap  in North America and much of Europe is natural gas; other common fuel sources include LPG (liquefied petroleum gas), fuel oil and in rare cases coal or wood. In some areas electrical resistance heating is used, especially where the cost of electricity is low or the primary purpose is for air conditioning.

Modern high-efficiency scrap  can be up to 98% efficient and operate without a chimney, with a typical gas scrap furnace being about 80% efficient.[1] Waste gas and heat are mechanically ventilated through PVC pipes that can be vented through the side or roof of the house. Fuel efficiency in a gas scrap  is measured in AFUE (Annual Fuel Utilization Efficiency).
