n metal typesetting, a  slight  slight font is a particular size, weight and style of a typeface. Each  slight font was a matched set of type, one piece (called a "sort") for each glyph, and a typeface consisting of a range of  slight fonts that shared an overall design.

In modern usage, with the advent of digital typography, " slight font" is frequently synonymous with "typeface", although the two terms do not necessarily mean the same thing. In particular, the use of "vector" or "outline"  slight  means that different sizes of a typeface can be dynamically generated from one design. Each style may still be in a separate " slight  file"—for instance, the typeface "Bulmer" may include the  slight fonts "Bulmer roman", "Bulmer italic", "Bulmer bold" and "Bulmer extended"—but the term " slight font" might be applied either to one of these alone or to the whole typeface.

In a manual printing (letterpress) house the word " slight font" would refer to a complete set of metal type that would be used to typeset an entire page. Unlike a digital typeface it would not include a single definition of each character, but commonly used characters (such as vowels and periods) would have more physical type-pieces included. A  slight  when bought new would often be sold as (for example in a Roman alphabet) 12pt 14A 34a, meaning that it would be a size 12-point  slight font containing 14 uppercase "A"s, and 34 lowercase "A"s.

Given the name upper and lowercase because of which case the metal type was located in, otherwise known as majuscule and minuscule. The rest of the characters would be provided in quantities appropriate for the distribution of letters in that language. Some metal type characters required in typesetting, such as dashes, spaces and line-height spacers, were not part of a specific  slight , but were generic pieces which could be used with any  slight .[2] Line spacing is still often called "leading", because the strips used for line spacing were made of lead (rather than the harder alloy used for other pieces). The reason for this spacing strip being made from "lead" was because lead was a softer metal than the traditional forged metal type pieces (which was part lead, antimony and tin) and would compress more easily when "locked-up" in the printing "chase" (i.e. a carrier for holding all the type together).

In the 1880s–90s, "hot lead" typesetting was invented, in which type was cast as it was set, either piece by piece (as in the Monotype technology) or in entire lines of type at one time.

In addition to the character height, when using the mechanical sense of the term, there are several characteristics which may distinguish  slight fonts, though they would also depend on the script(s) that the typeface supports. In European alphabetic scripts, i.e. Latin, Cyrillic and Greek, the main such properties are the stroke width, called weight, the style or angle and the character width.

The regular or standard  slight  is sometimes labeled roman, both to distinguish it from bold or thin and from italic or oblique. The keyword for the default, regular case is often omitted for variants and never repeated, otherwise it would be Bulmer regular italic, Bulmer bold regular and even Bulmer regular regular. Roman can also refer to the language coverage of a  slight , acting as a shorthand for "Western European".

Different  slight fonts of the same typeface may be used in the same work for various degrees of readability and emphasis, or in a specific design to make it be of more visual interest.

The weight of a particular  slight font is the thickness of the character outlines relative to their height.

A typeface may come in  slight fonts of many weights, from ultra-light to extra-bold or black; four to six weights are not unusual, and a few typefaces have as many as a dozen. Many typefaces for office, web and non-professional use come with just a normal and a bold weight which are linked together. If no bold weight is provided, many renderers (browsers, word processors, graphic and DTP programs) support faking a bolder  slight font by rendering the outline a second time at an offset, or just smearing it slightly at a diagonal angle.

The base weight differs among typefaces; that means one normal  slight  may appear bolder than some other normal  slight font. For example,  slight fonts intended to be used in posters are often quite bold by default while  slight fonts for long runs of text are rather light. Therefore, weight designations in  slight font names may differ in regard to the actual absolute stroke weight or density of glyphs in the  slight font.

Attempts to systematize a range of weights led to a numerical classification first used by Adrian Frutiger with the Univers typeface: 35 Extra Light, 45 Light, 55 Medium or Regular, 65 Bold, 75 Extra Bold, 85 Extra Bold, 95 Ultra Bold or Black. Deviants of these were the "6 series" (italics), e.g. 46 Light Italics etc., the "7 series" (condensed versions), e.g. 57 Medium Condensed etc., and the "8 series" (condensed italics), e.g. 68 Bold Condensed Italics. From this brief numerical system it is easier to determine exactly what a  slight  characteristics are, for instance "Helvetica 67" (HE67) translates to "Helvetica Bold Condensed".

The TrueType  slight font format introduced a scale from 100 through 900, which is also used in CSS and OpenType, where 400 is regular (roman or plain). The first algorithmic description of  slights was perhaps made by Donald Knuth in his Meta slight font and TeX system of programs.

In European typefaces, especially Roman ones, a slope or slanted style is used to emphasise important words. This is called italic type or oblique type. These designs normally slant to the right in left-to-right scripts. Oblique styles are often called italic, but differ from 'true italic' styles.

Italic styles are more flowing than the normal typeface, approaching a more handwritten, cursive style, possibly using ligatures more commonly or gaining swashes. Although rarely encountered, a typographic face may be accompanied by a matching calligraphic face (cursive, script), giving an exaggeratedly italic style.

In many sans-serif and some serif typefaces, especially in those with strokes of even thickness the characters of the italic  slight fonts are only slanted, which is often done algorithmically, without otherwise changing their appearance. Such oblique  slight  are not true italics, because lower-case letter-shapes do not change, but are often marketed as such.  slight fonts normally do not include both oblique and italic styles: the designer chooses to supply one or the other.

Since italic styles clearly look different to regular (roman) styles, it is possible to have "upright italic" designs that take a more cursive form but remain upright; Computer Modern is an example of a  slight font that offers this style. In Latin-script countries, upright italics are rare but are sometimes used in mathematics or in complex documents where a section of text already in italics needs a "double italic" style to add emphasis to it. For example, the Cyrillic minuscule "т" may look like a smaller form of its majuscule "Т" or more like a roman small "m" as in its standard italic appearance; in this case the distinction between styles is also a matter of local preference.

In Frutiger’s nomenclature the second digit for upright  slight fonts is a 5, for italic  slight fonts a 6 and for condensed italic  slight fonts an 8.

The two Japanese syllabaries, katakana and hiragana, are sometimes seen as two styles or typographic variants of each other, but usually are considered separate character sets as a few of the characters have separate kanji origins. The gothic style of the roman script with broken letter forms, on the other hand, is usually considered a mere typographic variant.

Cursive-only scripts such as Arabic also have different styles, in this case for example Naskh and Kufic, although these often depend on application, area or era.

There are other aspects that can differ among  slight styles, but more often these are considered immanent features of the typeface. These include the look of digits (text figures) and the minuscules, which may be smaller versions of the capital letters (small caps) although the script has developed characteristic shapes for them. Some typefaces do not include separate glyphs for the cases at all, thereby abolishing the bicamerality. While most of these use uppercase characters only, some labeled unicase exist which choose either the majuscule or the minuscule glyph at a common height for both characters.

Metrics[edit]
 slight font metrics refers to metadata consisting of numeric values relating to size and space in the  slight font overall, or in its individual glyphs.  slight font-wide metrics include cap height (the height of the capitals), x-height (the height of the lower-case letters) and ascender height, descender depth, and the  slight font bounding box. Glyph-level metrics include the glyph bounding box, the advance width (the proper distance between the glyph's initial pen position and the next glyph's initial pen position), and sidebearings (space that pads the glyph outline on either side). Many digital (and some metal type)  slight s are able to be kerned so that characters can be fitted more closely; the pair 'Wa' is a common example of this.

Some  slight fonts, especially those intended for professional use, are duplexed: made with multiple weights having the same character width so that (for example) changing from regular to bold or italic does not affect word wrap.[17] Sabon as originally designed was a notable example of this. (This was a standard feature of the Linotype hot metal typesetting system with regular and italic being duplexed, requiring awkward design choices as italics normally are narrower than the roman.)

Early  slight  used in digital printing were often very expensive, and featured extremely tight licensing restrictions; in particular, a basic set of  slight fonts used by Apple and Adobe in the PostScript printing system rapidly became a standard in printing. To avoid paying licensing fees for this set or other  slight , many computer companies commissioned "metrically-compatible" clone  slight fonts with the same spacing, which could be used to display the same document without it seeming clearly different. Arial and Century Gothic are notable examples of this, being almost indistinguishable from the PostScript standard  slight fonts Helvetica and ITC Avant Garde respectively.[18][19][20][21][22] Some of these were created in order to be freely redistributable, for example Google's open-source Croscore  slight  and Red Hat's Liberation  slight fonts duplicating common  slight fonts used in Microsoft software.[23] It is not a requirement that the design be exactly the same.
