The Innovative Success that is Apple, Inc.
Katherine Johnson
Yang Li
Hang Phan
Jason Singer
Hoang Trinh

Introduction- The Birth of a Brain Child
Apple, Inc. started out as an idea of one man. This man was Steve Jobs. Jobs and his friend,
Steve Wozniak, were two high school drop outs living in the Silicon Valley with extremely
innovative and intelligent minds (Santa Clara Historical Society, 2012). The pair teamed up, while
working for Hewlett Packard, to start Apple, Inc. from the basement of Jobs’ home (Santa Clara
Historical Society, 2012). The pair created the first Apple computer on April 1, 1976 (Santa Clara
Historical Society, 2012). The rest, as they say, is history. The creation of that first computer—and
subsequently the birth of Steve Jobs’ brain child-- is what started Jobs and Wozniak on the path that
has now revolutionized the way that many people all over the world use a computer, search the
internet, listen to music, and even talk on the phone. Apple, Inc. is the perfect example of how a
dream became a reality—one step at a time.
From Brain Child to Innovative Success (A Brief History of Apple, Inc.)
Ron Wayne, Steve Wozniak, and Steve Jobs founded what would become Apple, Inc. in
1976; however, soon after, Wayne left the company (Santa Clara Historical Society, 2012).
Steve Wozniak introduced and designed Apple’s first computer, the Apple I, to Hewlett Packard
(HP); HP was not impressed and chose not to pursue the venture (Doughtery, 2011). Jobs and
Wozniak did not let this deter them from continuing to develop and sell their computers. In 1978,
the Apple II was introduced and sales went from 35,000 computers in 1979 to 78,000 computers in
1980(Doughtery, 2011). Then, in 1980, the company (which consisted of about 1,000 employees at
the time) went public and the stock offering did well (Santa Clara Historical Society, 2012).
In the 1980’s and early 1990’s, Apple did well in sales due to new versions of Macintosh and
their new market, the office computers (Doughtery, 2011). In 1984, Apple made the Macintosh
computer; the Macintosh made sales of 70,000 units soon after it was made (The (Doughtery, 2011).
Shortly thereafter, there was a major power struggle among executives. This power struggle would
lead to the departure of Jobs and some other executives (Santa Clara Historical Society, 2012). The
combination of sales success and departure of the company’s leaders found Apple at a monetary loss
in the mid 1990’s which can be directly linked to unfilled orders for the Power Macintosh line of
computers(Doughtery, 2011).
In 1997, Steve Jobs returned to Apple as an advisor when Apple, Inc. purchased his new
company NeXT, Inc(Doughtery, 2011). Jobs then became CEO of Apple, Inc. and introduced the
iMac, which sold 800,000 units by 1998(Doughtery, 2011). From that point on, the company did
very well. Jobs and Apple began introducing new, innovative products one at a time; the iPod was
unveiled in 2001 and the iPhone in 2007(Doughtery, 2011). In 2008, the iTunes store sold more
music than Wal-Mart (who was the leading music provider up to that
point) and then the innovation continued with the introduction of the iPad in 2010 (Doughtery,
2011). The growth of Apple, Inc’s music sales was in direct correlation to the fact that iPods sold
275 million worldwide between 2001 and 2010(Doughtery, 2011). Jobs was consistently rated the
no. 1 CEO due to the value he added to Apple by coming up with these new products and, at this
time, Apple, Inc. is considered the world’s best company by many magazines (Doughtery, 2011). 
The Innovative Success that is Apple, Inc. 2
Apple Inc.’s Executive Management Team
Apple, Inc. has experienced several changes in the executives that run the company in the
last couple of years. Unfortunately, the company experienced the death of Founder and CEO, Steve
Jobs. This left the company looking for new leadership and direction. Recently, the company
named Tim Cook as the new CEO of Apple, Inc. According to www.apple.com, Cook was named
acting CEO and member of the Board of Directors in August of 2011 (2012).
 Appointing Cook as CEO seems to be a strategic and logical decision as Cook was previously
the COO for Apple and was responsible for sales and operations worldwide, which includes being
responsible for the management of “Apple’s supply chain, sales activities, and service and support in
all markets” (Apple, Inc., 2012). All of this experience should prove to serve him well in his new
position. In addition to this experience with Apple, Inc., he also used to head Apple’s Macintosh
division and was a key player in the continued development of “strategic seller and supplier
relationships” (Apple, Inc., 2012). Before coming to Apple, Inc., Cook gained experience working
for other computer companies (Compaq and IBM) (Apple, Inc., 2012). This experience in such
previous roles has proven Cook to be a flexible, capable leader
for this company. Cook’s education has served him well. He has been able to use his M.B.A. from
Duke University and his Bachelor of Science in Industrial Engineering from Auburn University to
good use (Apple, Inc., 2012).
Cook has a supporting cast of Vice Presidents that should be able to help him continue with
success at Apple, Inc. Eddy Cue, the Senior Vice President of Internet Software and Services, is a
twenty-three year veteran of Apple and was a major part in creating Apple’s online store and the
iTunes store (Apple, Inc., 2012). Craig Federighi, the Senior Vice President of Software
Engineering, brings years of experience from working under Jobs at Apple and NeXT (Apple, Inc.,
2012). Jonathon Ive, the Senior Vice President of Industrial Design, is known as “the driving force
behind the look and feel of Apple’s innovative products” as he is the man that has lead the design
team for the company since 1996 (Apple, Inc., 2012). Bob Mansfield, the Senior Vice President of
Technologies, has been responsible for overseeing several breakthroughs in regards to Mac products
since 1999 (Apple, Inc., 2012). Peter Oppenheimer, the Senior Vice President and Chief Financial
Officer, has been using his financial background and education to Apple as a controller then the
CFO since 1996 (Apple, Inc., 2012). Dan Riccio, the Senior Vice President of Hardware
Engineering has been with Apple since 1998 and is responsible for leading the engineering teams
that develop the Mac, iPhone, iPad, and iPod products (Apple, Inc., 2012). Phillip W. Schiller, the
Vice President of Worldwide Marketing, has twenty-fives of marketing management, the majority of
which has spent with Apple over thecourse of his two different stints with the company (Apple.,
Inc., 2012). Bruce Sewell, the Senior Vice President and General Counsel, brings his over twentyfive
years of legal experience in the technology realm to his position in which he handles all legal
matters for Apple, Inc. (Apple, Inc., 2012). Jeff Williams, the Senior Vice President of Operations
brings over twenty-five years of operational and engineering experience to his position where he is
responsible for the quality control and supply chain management (Apple, Inc., 2012). With more
than two centuries worth of experience in the industry combined when it comes to their top
executives, it is now wonder that Apple, Inc. continues to be an extremely successful company.
 While Apple, Inc. has lost a visionary and innovative genius with the loss of Steve Jobs, Tim
Cook is a worthy individual to be named CEO of this company. In his first quarter alone, Cook saw
Apple post revenue of $36 billion and a quarterly net profit of $8.2 billion as compared to the
previous year at the same time when the company posted revenue of $28.3 billion and a net profit of
$6.6 billion (refer to exhibit 1) (Apple, Inc., 2012). His education, work experience, and supporting
cast empower him with the tools to keep moving Apple, Inc. forward.
The Innovative Success that is Apple, Inc. 3
Apple, Inc.’s Vision
As found on the company’s website, Apple, Inc.’s vision is the following: “Apple is
committed to bringing the best personal computing experience to students, educators, creative
professionals and consumers around the world through its innovative hardware, software and
Internet offerings”(Apple, Inc., 2012).
Apple, Inc.’s Mission
As found on the company’s website, Apple, Inc.’s mission is the following:
Apple designs Macs, the best personal computers in the world, along with OS X,
iLife, iWork and professional software. Apple leads the digital music revolution with
its iPods and iTunes online store. Apple has reinvented the mobile phone with its
revolutionary iPhone and App Store, and is defining the future of mobile media and
computing devices with iPad((Apple, Inc., 2012).
Apple, Inc.’s Values
As found on the company’s website, Apple, Inc.’s values are as follows:
• We believe that we’re on the face of the Earth to make great products.
• We believe in the simple, not the complex.
• We believe that we need to own and control the primary technologies behind the
products we make.
• We participate only in markets where we can make a significant contribution.
• We believe in saying no to thousands of projects so that we can really focus on the
few that are truly important and meaningful to us.
• We believe in deep collaboration and cross-pollination of our groups, which allow us
to innovate in a way that others cannot.
• We don’t settle for anything less than excellence in every group in the company, and
we have the self-honesty to admit when we’re wrong and courage to change. (Apple,
Inc., 2012).
Apple, Inc.’s Business Strategy and Goals
As seen in the company’s vision, mission, and values, Apple In. has a clear strategy and set
of goals. Apple, Inc. defined their strategy and goals in their last annual report as the following:
The Company is committed to bringing the best user experience to its customers
through its innovative hardware, software, peripherals, and services. The Company’s
business strategy leverages its unique ability to design and develop its own operating
systems, hardware, application software, and services to provide its customers new
products and solutions with superior ease-of-use, seamless integration, and
innovative design. The company believes continual investment in research and
development and marketing and advertising is critical to the development and sale of
innovative products and technologies. As part of its strategy, the Company
continues to expand its platform for the discovery and delivery of third-party digital
content and applications through the iTunes Store. As part of the iTunes Store, the
company’s App Store and iBook store allow customers to discover and download
applications and books through either a Mac or Windows-based computer or
through “iOS devices,” namely iPhone, iPad and iPod touch. In January 2011, the
Company opened the Mac App Store to allow customers to easily discover,
download and install applications for their Macs. The company also supports a 
The Innovative Success that is Apple, Inc. 4
community for the development of third-party software and hardware products and
digital content that complement the Company’s offerings. The Company’s strategy
also includes expanding its distribution network to effectively reach more customers
and provide them with a high-quality sales and post-sales support
experience.”(Apple’s Annual Report, 2011).
Now that Apple Inc.’s strategy and goals have been shown, a look at what effects the
decisions of the executive staff in regards to the general environment is needed.
Apple, Inc.’s General Environment
There are many factors associated with the general environment of a company. The
following are details of certain segments that have a profound effect of Apple, Inc. as a whole:
Technological segment
In the computer hardware industry, technology is the top factor that influences the success of a
company. The innovation of technical progress provides better, faster and cheaper electronic
products every year as it also creates a market segment as new products and markets are created.
Therefore, the innovation in technology makes the industry fiercer as a whole each and every year.
According to the Gartner website, worldwide demand of the PC market is declining 0.1 percent
from the second quarter of 2011 (refer to exhibit 2) (2012). In the U.S., PC shipments totaled 15.9
million units in the second quarter of 2012, which was a decline of 5.7 percent from the same period
last year (refer to exhibit 3) (Gartner, 2012).In the IDC press release, the worldwide tablet shipments
for the second quarter of 2012 are estimated at 25 million units, an increase of 66.2 percent from 15
million units in the second quarter of 2011 (IDC group, 2012 ). This large increase reflects
consumers shifting their interest to smart phones and tablets from
PCs. Global tablet sales will reach 232 million units in 2016, according to the last Tablet Technology
and Markets report from Future Source Consulting (eMarketer, 2012).
Threat: New products from rival firms could lead to Apple products being less in demand. Acer and
ASUS are starting to unveil mini notebooks and might move quickly into the high-end tablet market.
Technological change occurs very fast and if Apple cannot keep up with changes in technology,
Apple will be left behind their rivals.
Demographic segment:
Home access to the internet has increased dramatically over the last decade, along with the dramatic
increase in the use of computers, tablets, cell phones, and electronic books. The United States
population from 2012 census data was estimated at 314,440,891, while more than 110 million people
in the U.S. owned some type of smartphone in June 2012 and 43.2 million U.S. consumers ages 18
to 34 logged on to the mobile web this year alone. The U.S. tablet users are estimated to reach 89.5
million (an increase 35.6 percent) in 2014 (eMarketer, June 2012). The number of younger people
accessing the internet by phone is increasing drastically. In 2010, almost six out of ten children ages
3- 17 used the internet at home, an increase of 22 percent in 1997 to 57 percent in 2010 (Child
Trends, 2012).
According to New Media Trend Watch USA’s “demographic profile of U.S. smartphone
users who have used a QR code, February 2011,” the gender ratio is 51% male and 49% female; the
age ratio is 39% from 18 to 34, 48% from 35 to 54, and 13% above 55; the household income ratio
is 6% for less than $25K, 23% from $25K to $50K, and 71% for more than $50K; the education
level ratio is 11% high school, 26% College or associate and 63% University (eMarketer, April 2011).
The Innovative Success that is Apple, Inc. 5
Opportunity: The increasing use in internet access, especially with smartphones and tablets, will lead
to an increase in demand for the devices. Apple could be expanding its sales through these
opportunities and maintain its leader position.
Socio-cultural segment:
 The socio-cultural factor is important to companies that develop worldwide because culture
could be restrictive to companies’ profitability. It is not easy to adapt to the different cultures and
be successful with the international segment. Apple faces difficulty when it comes to selling their
products in the Asian market because the 3G & 4G technology have not been popular there yet
(Worstall, 2012). Furthermore, the habit of trading in cash in Asia is still a problem for a high initial
cost of the computer industry. People in China would like to see stuff when they purchase it,
somehow they do not prefer to accept credit card transactions (Worstall, 2012).
Apple, Inc.’s Industry
According to the Apple Inc. annual report, Apple is engaged in “designing, manufacturing
and marketing mobile communication and media devices, personal computers, and portable digital
music players and sells a variety of related software, services” (2011). The company had been
previously known as Apple Computer Inc.; however, Apple Inc. removed the word “Computer” in
2007 to reflect the company’s focus towards consumer electronics and digital distribution (Apple,
Inc., 2012). Apple Inc. now is in the computer hardware, computer software, consumer electronics,
and digital distribution industries (Apple, Inc., 2012). In these industries, the key factor is
undoubtedly technology. The popularity of technological innovation can help a top company by
creating competitive advantages, but also bring more competitors to the market. Most of the
products in the industry are based on technological innovation. Companies in these industries have
to introduce new products or services frequently due to there being numerous active competitors.
Besides leadership that can address the strategy which creates the competitive advantage of a
company, investing in research and development (R&D) is also very important. The product lifecircle
in these industries is shorter than any products from other industries (Gross, 2012). One
product can be out-of-date in less than one year without an improvement from technology (Gross,
2012). All that facts show that technological innovation is a key aspect of the industries that Apple,
Inc. is in.
Due to the constant growth of technology, the industries that Apple is in are some of the
most unpredictable industries nowadays. Before 2007, there was no touch screen phone that people
could use by hand and Apple, with its technology, changed the definition of a smartphone with the
introduction of their first iPhone (Copeland, 2010). Furthermore, Sony had created the first
portable music player in 1979 and then more than eleven years later, the Japanese company changed
the music industry again by introducing a Discman in 1990 (Bertolucci, 2009). A mere eleven years
after the introduction of the Discman, Apple made a big change in the industry with the first
generation of iPods (Bertolucci, 2009). It shows that through technology, an industry can change
very quickly and no one can know what will be the next level of technology or the next great
technological breakthrough.
In these industries, several different strategic groups exist. Due to the popularity of
technology and the supply chain, most of the products in the industry can be provided globally;
therefore, price is the most frequent aspect to analyze strategic group in the industry (Hess, 2006).
Besides price, technology companies can define their core value by targeting different levels of
customers, such as consumer or business customers (Hess, 2006). They also can develop their
strategy based on their core product, such as digital or physical asset (Hess, 2006).Following a 
The Innovative Success that is Apple, Inc. 6
strategic group analysis, Apple targets to consumers in the high-tech market, providing both digital
and physical assets (Fast Company, 2011). The company defines itself as a high class technology
company by setting a premium price to most other competitive products (Apple, Inc., 2012). This
high-tech company not only sells hardware, but also develops its own software to support its line of
products (AppleInsiderstaff, 2007). In short, Apple Inc.’s strategy in the industry is clearly welldefined
and this helps the company stand out from other competitors.
The Target Market/Customers
There is no point to having great products if there is no target market for those products.
Apple, Inc. focuses on marketing to people with a few different characteristics. Middle and upper
class income people are a primary focus for Apple because these demographics are usually willing to
pay slightly more for “a better user experience” because $500 for a laptop is not a stretch for them
(www.patentlyapple.com, 2010). Obviously, technological innovators like Apple are going to focus
on people who like to have fun with technology; Apple’s extensive line of entry level devices and
tools is beginning to appeal to people of all ages and not just the coveted 18 to 34 year old
demographic that seems to be thoroughly enthralled by the company and its products
(www.patentlyapple.com, 2010). Thanks to iPods and iTunes (and their impressive compatibility
with all other Apple products), Apple is able to target music enthusiasts from a large age
demographic (www.patenltyapple.com, 2010). Additionally, thanks to their cutting-edge technology,
Apple is also able to target professionals that work in media and design (www.patentlyapple.com,
2010). While Apple’s prices are generally higher (a new iPhone could be $800 or a new iPad almost
$2000), they are able to appeal to people of all ages and demographics due to their reputation of
impressive technological breakthroughs, while still managing to focus on targeting the customers
that were just discussed.
Apple, Inc.’s Suppliers
Besides popular products, Apple Inc. has been known worldwide as being superior when it
comes to supply chain management. In the annual Supply Chain Top 25 report in 2010, ARM
research ranked Apple Inc. a top place in a list of retail and manufacturing heavyweights (refer to
exhibit 4)(Wailgum, 2010). Apple Inc. scored 8.21, which was significantly higher than the second
place, Proctor & Gamble(P&G), which scored a 5.91(Wailgum, 2010). The key factor of Apple’s
supply chain is effectiveness. The company’s unparalleled demand-shaping capability lets its supply
chain record spectacular results without sweating costs like everyone else, according to ARM
research in 2007(Wailgum, 2010). Also according to AMR, Apple "dominates because it consistently
brings both operational and innovation excellence to bear in some of the most competitive markets
in the world. From a supply chain perspective, the company's ability to ramp volumes both in
hardware and software while redefining what a mobile telephone is supposed to be has been
impressive" (Wailgum, 2010). In order to archive an effectively supply system, Apple Inc. has
contracts with many different suppliers in the world. In the Apple Supplier Responsibility report in
2012, Apple, Inc. release that it has 229 audits that connect with the company, more than100 of
these are in manufacturing, which the company never had before 2012 (Apple, Inc., 2012). Most of
their important manufacturers are in China for low cost purposes. Their LCD panel suppliers are
from Korea, which is explained as a quality control issue (Wailgum, 2010). All of this shows that the
Apple, Inc. supply chain is very active, effective, and efficient.
The Innovative Success that is Apple, Inc. 7
Issues with the Supply Chain
While Apple Inc. has been receiving praises for its supply chain, there are issues with the
high-tech company’s system. Working conditions in Apple’s manufacturing locations is the first
issue in the company’s supply chain. Apple’s largest assembling partner, Foxconn has been reported
as having low working conditions (Cho, 2012). In Foxconn factories, their source of workers should
be a topic for further discussion and consideration. According to a report in 2010, there were
900,000 plus employees in these factories and many of them were students that aged in range from
16 to 18 that were forced to work on the line for up to 2 years (Chan, 2010). Also, the Chinese
factories have many workers who are pressured to work overtime on a regular basis (Cho, 2012).
From the same article, there is a survey showing that 73.3 percent of employees work 10 hours or
more a day; the average overtime is 83.2 hours a month—an obvious breach of the official labor
laws, which limit monthly overtime to 36 hours a month (Chan, 2010). As a result, twenty workers
attempted suicide, fourteen of them succeeding in their attempts, in recent history (Kan, 2012). At
another Apple component supplier, Foxlink, a Chinese man committed suicide by jumping out of
the sixth floor on Sep. 29, 2012 (Kan, 2012). These are significant alerts to the working conditions
in Foxconn factories and other factories of Apple Inc.’s suppliers.
The second issue of Apple Inc.’s supply chain is related to the relationship between the
company and its suppliers. According to Jessica E. Lessinand IanSherr in The Wall Street Journal,
the high-tech company cannot archive the expectation number of sales by the end of 2012 due to an
insufficient supply chain (2012). Apple’s suppliers do not have the capacity to produce enough parts
for the current product demand. Although Apple, Inc. has many suppliers all around the world,
when the supply chain is assessed piece by piece, it is found that some components (which are very
important to the company products) are chips and LCD Panels (Lessin, 2012). Samsung, the largest
LCD screens supplier of Apple, Inc., has plans to stop providing their products to Apple, as
revealed in The Korea Times, because the Korean company no longer finds it beneficial to continue
cooperating with Apple (Cho, 2012). Because of this, Apple will be left with only two suppliers of
LCD screens that both have a severe lack of experience; these suppliers, LGD and AUO, will be all
Apple has to support their current and new products (Cohan, 2012). This will lead to an insufficient
number of products to meet the market demand and cause a big loss of sales for Apple during the
holiday season. A lack of control by Apple in regards to its assembly manufacturers also causes a
delay in delivery to already customers that have already placed their orders as recently as October of
2012 (Cohan, 2012). The company’s customers have been told to wait about a month for item
delivery due to problems with Foxconn’s worker riot (Cohan, 2012). Things are going downhill in
regards to Apple’s supply chain, therefore, the high-tech company should take action if it want to
continue to maintain its previous success levels.
Apple, Inc.’s Competitors’ Comparison
 As a company of research and development that produces high-tech products, Apple has many
strong opponents in the world, such as: Google, Microsoft, HP, and Amazon. Apple is not the
company with the most seniority in the IT industry history, so it begs to question how the company
managed to produce products that beat all the opponents. Apple, Inc. has quickly become a legend.
Apple treats innovation as the source of the survival and development of a business at the beginning
stage, and Apple has successfully penetrated this idea into the corporate culture (refer to exhibit 4)
(Tim Cook, 2012). It is precisely this idea that makes Apple’s products so unique. Apple is
synonymous with innovation in the public mind; formal innovation is what has lead Apple to always
guide the trend from 1984 with the introduction of the revolutionary Macintosh computer to 2012 
The Innovative Success that is Apple, Inc. 8
when the iPhone5 came out (Cohan, 2012). Apple has a grasp on the requirements of consumer
products while, at the same time, the production of the products is an impeccable, luxurious,
technologically sound dream with the requirements to become fashionable products as well; all this
combines to make people willing to pick Apple products rather than other similar products when it
comes to making purchases (Barrett, 2012). The correct Apple product positioning, along with
target market and consumer satisfaction, help Apple products to have a really good reputation in
general. Apple’s almost dizzying speed of new product releases has literally left other companies far
behind in the market.
Why Apple Will Win
The iPhone, iPad, and all the other I-products will keep leading the world's media product wants.
Apple is the No.1 wealthiest company in the world now(at least in regards to the fact that they get
the most cash on hand show in their balance sheet) (Apple, Inc., 2012). These products have helped
to create an Apple empire in the history of business. Apple, Inc. grows faster than any other
company. The rate of their revenue increase is over 50% in the most recent three to four years;
sometimes the revenue increases even double this number (Apple, Inc., 2012). Apple's previous
CEO, Steve Jobs, nor Apple’s current CEO, Tim Cook, has not done anything wrong to slowdown
this amazing growth.
Apple just keeps hitting new records. The third quarter of 2010 saw the company hit 15.7 billion in
revenue; a mere year later, that revenue almost doubled when it reached 28.57 for the same quarter
(Fast Company, 2011). This is exceptionally impressive in regards to a revenue increase during a
non-holiday season. Meanwhile, Apple Inc.’s cash reserves managed to total more than the entire net
worth of many small countries, as well as the U.S. Treasury’s (Fast Company, 2011).All the Apple
products did well in sales in regards to their own markets (refer to exhibit 5).
Horizontal Approach (hardware)
PC: Apple Mac VS HP
 In the personal computer market, Apple did not perform as well as its other products. As seen in
the first quarter of 2012, "the research company Canalys reported HP shipped 40,000 more client
PCs than Apple in the first three months of the year. Apple had passed up HP in regards to sales of
products in the fourth quarter of 2011, but 15.43 million were Apple iPads and only 5.2 million were
Macs (Fast Company, 2011). If tablets do not count as PCs, HP will be the sales champion in PC
market.
 Computer Pricing is the main problem when it comes to the Apple Mac’s difficult quest to beat
HP. For just $350, you could get a laptop with a DVD/CD-RW drive, 4GB DDR3 SDRAM a
17.3-inch widescreen display, 500GB hard drive and built-in webcam from HP (Kan, 2012). These
are all the basic features for people that just want to surf online and check e-mail; it is difficult to get
a person to spend $1,000 to purchase a Mac that does the same thing as this significantly cheaper
HP (Kan, 2012).Despite the significantly higher price, Apple’s desktop computers were rated at a
“better-than-average” score in seven of nine different categories and readers were “very satisfied”
with the overall reliability of Macs themselves; Apple received high scores on two different measures
regarding customer service and Mac Book notebook computers received high marks as well, with a
“better-than-average” score in six different categories (Fast Company, 2011). The high cost leads
many customers to choose other, more cost-effective computers.
It has been said that the "IPAD changes everything" as it becomes a new area of the
computer industry; Apple CEO, Tim Cook, said he believed "that there will come a day that the
tablet market and units sold is larger than the PC market"(Copeland, 2010).
The Innovative Success that is Apple, Inc. 9
Financial Comparison
 When looking the stock price in recent five years (refer to exhibit 5), it can easily be seen that
Apple performed much better than HP (Worstall, 2012). Using the simple moving average index, it
can be seen that Apple’s stock increased 361. 25 percent from 2007 to 2012, but HP’s stock actually
went down 72.68 percent in this same time period (Worstall, 2012). From 2010 to 2011, HP’s return
on sales decreased 1.4 percent and their market capitalization shrank by $44,710 million (Worstall,
2012).
Tablet: iPad VS Amazon Kindle Fire
Apple tablets are top in customer satisfaction, followed by Amazon’s Kindle Fire, but
Samsung tablets are related below the industry average, as found in a J.D. Power survey (refer to
exhibit 6) (TWICE, October 2012). Arguably, "Amazon Prime, the $79-a-year subscription service
that gives customers free two-day shipping and access to movies and TV shows, creates Amazon
addicts: In the year before a customer joins, he spends $400 a year, on average; in the year after,
$900. Prime growth exceeds 50% annually” (TWICE, October 2012). While the PC market may be
gasping for air, the market for new tablet hardware is growing more intense.
 In the latest challenge to Apple's dominance in the fast-growing market for tablet computers, the
New York Times reported in early November of 2012 that Amazon is preparing a larger version of
its pint-size Kindle Fire tablet computer (the Kindle Fire now has a 7-inch screen and a starting
price of $199) (Moscaritolo, 2012). Apple, meanwhile, is preparing a version of its iPad tablet
computer with a 7.85-inch screen and a cut-rate price tag, Nick Winfield and Nick Bilton reported
for the Times (Moscaritolo, 2012).
Apple already faces fresh challenges from Google, which began shipping the Nexus 7 tablet
this month, and Microsoft, which unveiled a pair of tablet computers they named “Surfaced” last
month (How Tim Cook, 2012).So far, at least, Apple has managed to vanquish all
challengers. Research in Motion's Playbook, Hewlett-Packard's Touchpad, and Dell's Streak line of
tablets have all struggled as sales of Apple's iPad continue to surge (Moscaritolo, 2012).
Apple has created a differentiated core is an effective combination of products and services.
This differentiated combination mode has been a miracle for Apple, Inc. in recent years, as it is
typically reflected in the combination of two: IPod + ITunes or IPhone + App Store (Moscaritolo,
2012). These two models also help Apple iPad when it comes to the decision of purchasing it or the
Kindle fire.
IPOD + ITUNES Combination
Apple’s iPod and iTunes are two different products that came out in January and October
2001 respectively (Einstein, 2012). The iPod experienced a series of innovative upgrades since its
inception, as many as dozens of different versions of the development have been unveiled from
then until the 2008 3 Series (Einstein, 2012). Its unique fashion design in appearance is completely
different from other types of MP3 players (Einstein, 2012). Price differentiation is reflected in the
global uniform pricing and never for sale; advertising investment for enterprises to create a good
market image and brand of long-term high-cost attractive, and so on, these innovation,
differentiation, global sales of the iPod player slightly increased from 50 million per year on the basis
of 2006 cumulative sales of over 160 million U.S. dollars (Einstein, 2012).
The iTunes online music store is a powerful music manager of software, the key additional
feature that consumers value. The iTunes online store sells digital music for $ 0.99 a song to make
it, from the outset, distinguished from other music CD sales based retailers (Cohan, 2012). Just in
two years since the beginning of 2006 to the end of 2008, a record five billion songs were sold
The Innovative Success that is Apple, Inc. 10
(Cohan, 2012). Not long after that, it was decided that iTunes was to enter the fields of film,
television, games (Cohan, 2012).
In statistics found by the market research firm NPD Group, iTunes ranked first in the first
half of 2008 (Einstein, 2012). The iTunes leading both strong, driven from the player market iPod
also comes from the nation's first network of the iTunes music retailer status. Approximately 2900
people went through the network to purchase legitimate digital music products in 2007; that same
year, 48% of young people no longer bought CDs and with this change in trend, the rapid rise of
digital music has weakened the status of the traditional music retailers (Einstein, 2012). Although the
competitors who have established online music stores exhibit low prices in an attempt to attract
users, the continuous improvement of the software features a huge music library of more than 800
million songs, give up copyright protection technology, and other measures in a timely manner,
which still makes iTunes to keep the most popular the online music store position (Einstein, 2012).
Smartphones
Apple iPhone VS Google phone
Google powered 12.5 billion of 19.5 billion total searches in the U.S. in August 2011,
according to comScore (Simonsen, 2012). Google's dominant position in search is the platform that
lets it aggressively target mobile, social, local, and other new frontiers. An analyst from financial
research firm Global Equities Research has some bad news for Microsoft (MSFT) and
Research (RIMM) (Simonsen, 2012). In an interview with e-Week, Trip Chowdhry predicted
that Apple (AAPL) and Google(GOOG) will control 98% of the mobile market by the end of 2012
(IDC, 2012).Chowdhry went on to say that there “will not be any third spot left…Nokia, Microsoft
and RIM will struggle in the remaining 2 percent of the market.” Research firm IDC in August of
2012 found that Google and Apple controlled 85% of the global market, however Chowdhry
defended his bold prediction (IDC, 2012).
The global telecommunications industry has become a core industry in regards to the world
economy since the mid-1980s; the mobile phone industry has unquestionably become the most
important sector of the telecommunications industry (Hess, 2006).As two of the leading companies
in the mobile industry, Apple and Google each want to win the final game, and which mobile
platform (iOS or android) will attract more customers' eyes will be the key to success (Simonsen,
2012).
January 9, 2007, Apple introduced the smart phone known as the iPhone (Apple, Inc., 2012).
Since that time, Apple has introduced, in the design of the iPhone, a multi-touch touch screen,
gravity sensor, electronic compass with GPS, and a camera, as well as a unique interface design
(Simonsen, 2012). These phone features put the iPhone far ahead of other brands of phones on the
operator interface at the time. The fiscal year of 2007 saw the first quarter to third quarter of sales
leap from 270,000 to 1,120,000; this leap was a sales growth rate of an extremely high 314.44%
(Simonsen, 2012).
The launch of the iPhone helped Apple achieve success in personal phone innovation. The
success of the iPod plus iTunes, lead Apple to see the enormous potential of the terminal content
services market. In order to innovate strategically, Apple began the transition from a manufacture
of just consumer electronics to a provider of terminal-based content (Hess, 2006).Google, Inc. is an
American multinational technology company that is committed to the field of
Internet search, cloud computing, and advertising technology (Simonsen, 2012).Google has
developed a large number of Internet-based products and service, but the company’s main profits
are from Ad Words and other advertising services (Simonsen, 2012). After the acquisition of
Motorola, Google designed and released a phone that has since been a challenger to Apple’s iPhone 
The Innovative Success that is Apple, Inc. 11
series (Simonsen, 2012).
In an unexpected move, Google announced that they had signed an acquisition agreement
with Motorola. According to this agreement, Google was to pay $40 per share of Motorola Mobility
stock—a total of $12.5 billion in cash (Simonsen, 2012). What is the effect of this acquisition? This
acquisition allowed Google to launch the Android phone rather early on, but the company is yet to
set foot into the hardware industry (Simonsen, 2012). Instead, Google provides the software for
companies like HTC and Samsung (Simonsen, 2012). At this point, Google is not a hardware
vendor. Unfortunately, Google did get itself into a legal battle (which it lost) with Apple, Inc. due to
the Android operating system that it created to be used in the HTC and Samsung phones due to this
system’s similarity to the iPhone’s system itself (Simonsen, 2012). Google's acquisition of Motorola
Mobility should eventually lead to the logical production of mobile phones. Google's latest version
of the Android software will be used in the first Motorola phone that is released since the
acquisition; this "super phone" will not be done overnight because it will be a combination of
hardware and software that the company wants to be sure is paired perfectly (Simonsen, 2012).
Vertical approach (software): Operating system VS Microsoft
Apple has had some great success when it comes to its computer operating system. The
main rival for Apple, Inc. in the computer software world is Microsoft (Kan, 2012). However, when
Apple’s computer, tablet, and smartphone operating system’s are combined in usage, Apple, Inc.
really is far above the competition. This complex domination can be explained as follows:
According to the latest monthly totals from web metrics firm Net Applications,
global usage of Apple’s (AAPL) Mac OS X platform overtook that of Microsoft’s
(MSFT) Windows Vista in the month of August. The Cupertino-based company’s
operating system accounted for 7.13% of worldwide usage while Vista fell to 6.15%.
The latest version of OS X, known as Mountain Lion, has seen extremely fast
adoption and already has a worldwide usage share of 1.34%. In the same month,
Windows 7 finally surpassed Windows XP to become the most popular operating
system in the world. The firm also found that Apple’s iPad and iPhone accounted for
3.37% and 2.42% of Web traffic respectively, while the Android operating system
made up only 1.71% of traffic (Kan, 2012).
Apple’s MAC OS X system also has a really good performance in mobile technology area.
WINDOWS MOBILE (WM), the SYMBIAN and the PALM smart phone operating systems are
designs that feature low phone CPU and various memory issues due to unresolved defects such as
the WM system is too complex, the SYMBIAN system is slow, and the PALM system is not stable
(Dan, 2012). Apple’s iPhone directly uses the interface optimized desktop
computer operating system MAC OS X, which enables the smartphone to exhibit all of the
advantages of the MAC OS X operating system: running quickly, beautiful interface, and easy to
operate (Dan, 2012). Unlike other smart phone systems to streamline the office, the iPhone’s fully
functional e-mail software and SAFARI Web browser accounted for more than 70% of the mobile
Internet browser market (Dan, 2012).
Advertisements
Apple, Inc. has become well-known for its advertisements in the past couple decades. Their
ads have been designed to reflect the company’s business plan of targeting creative individuals to
market their products to through various campaigns like the infamous “1984 Super Bowl
commercial, the 1990sThink Different Campaign, and the iPod people of the 2000s campaign”
(Nudd, 2011).
The Innovative Success that is Apple, Inc. 12
Regarding its advertising budget, Apple (AAPL) spent a lot of money for advertising over
the past several years. In the 2009 fiscal year, the company spent US $501 million, which was up
from US $486 million in 2008 and US $467 million in 2007 (Nudd, 2011).While this may seem like
an overabundance of money spent on advertising, Apple’s budget was comparatively less when
compared with the US $1.4 billion spent by Microsoft (MSFT) in 2009 (Nudd, 2011). In fact, as a
percentage of revenue, Apple had actually been decreasing its ad spending every year, from nearly
5% in 2001 to 1.37% in 2009 (Nudd, 2011). This amount is less than half of the 3.6% of revenue
that Research in Motion (RIMM) spends just on advertising Blackberries (Nudd, 2011).
Apple, Inc.’s Competitive Positioning
Apple has been a leader in innovation for a long time. They may not be the first to
introduce the product, but many times they are the first to lower the price and mass produce the
product. Once they have taken the product to this new level, they then raise prices and watch the
business roll in (Worstall, 2012). It is after this that their competitors try to mimic them in many
ways. Take for instance, the iPod; the main feature here was memory (Worstall, 2012). Apple gave
a person the ability to put his/her entire music library on a single device no bigger than your palm.
In 2001, the iPod could hold 1,000 CD-quality songs into an ultra-portable, 6.5 ounce design that
fits into someone’s pocket (Gross, 2012). It was also different because it had the Auto-Sync, which
automatically downloads iTunes songs and playlists into an iPod and keeps them up to date
whenever someone simply plugs his/her iPod into his/her Macintosh computer. iPod’s built-in Fire
Wire port allows the customer to download an entire CD into iPod in under 10 seconds and 1,000
songs in less than 10 minutes (Gross, 2012). At the time of introduction, this unprecedented speed
was 30 times faster than USB-based players (Gross, 2012). Apple made the iPod easier to use than
other mp3 players at the time as well (Gross, 2012).
The suggested retail price of the iPod on November 10, 2001, when it was introduced, was
$399 dollars (Gross, 2012). In 1998, the Mp3 player was introduced, earlier than the iPod. The
MPMAN was $250 and had only 32 MB of memory (Gross, 2012). But the year that the iPod came
out, for $799 you could get the holy grail of Mp3 players at the time which could only hold 100
CD’s (Gross, 2012). So, the iPod was a much better deal at 1000 songs for only $399. The iPod
was literally half the price of its biggest memory competition for ten times as many songs. Once
Apple introduced this product, they became the leader in sales when it came to portable music
devices (Gross, 20120. As a company, Apple likes to market toward hi- tech people that want a
great product no matter what the cost (Apple, Inc., 2012). The sleek white design of the first iPod
won over consumers (Gross, 2012). Now Apple is the leader in music players (Gross, 2012). Since
the introduction of the iPod, they have introduced the shuffle, nano, iPod touch, and other products
that tailor to that niche market that the company tends to focus on (Apple, Inc., 2012).
However, the iPod was not the only product that Apple revolutionized. They were the first
to revolutionize the computer. They may not have been first to introduce the computer, but they
were the first to mass produce them and really take them to the next level. With their Macintosh 2,
their sales went from 35,000 to 78,000 units by 1980 (Santa Clara Historical Society, 2012).
Suddenly people saw that their computers were not only better, but they looked better as well. The
Apple 2 differed from its major rivals, the TRS-80 and Commodore PET, because it came with
character cell based color graphics and an open architecture (Nudd, 2012). Another reason Apple 2
was better is that it gave users a compatibility with the office (Nudd, 2012).
The iPad was also revolutionary in its own right. The availability of applications on the
device drew many consumers (Copeland, 2012). Its portability makes it better than a laptop in many
ways; additionally, the iPad has the capability of the consumer placing it into a keyboard setup that 
The Innovative Success that is Apple, Inc. 13
will let you type with a keyboard on your iPad just like the consumer could on a laptop (Copeland,
2012). Apple was not the first to make the tablet, but they were just the first to make it great and
affordable (Copeland, 2012). A total of 300,000 iPads were sold on their first day of availability
(Copeland, 2012). By May 3, 2010, very shortly after the products release, Apple had sold a million
iPads; this was in half the time it took Apple to sell the same number of original iPhones (Copeland,
2012). TheiPads and all of Apple’s computing products use the same operating system which is
virtually virus free and easier, much straight forward to use than other operating systems (Copeland,
2012). Many consumers buy Apple products for that very reason alone. They want a product that is
easy to use. That is how Apple is able to keep the stable demand for their products, by using a
focused strategy that markets to this niche: Hi-tech people that like a top of the line product that is
also easy to use and straight forward (Copeland, 2012).
The iPhone was introduced in 2007 at a Macworld Expo by Steve Jobs (Barrett, 2012).
During his address, he pretended to introduce three devices: a new cell phone, an internet
communicator and a widescreen iPod (Barrett, 2012). After the audience cheered for each new
device, jobs then admitted that only one product was able to do all of these functions, plus a number
of other great innovations (Barrett, 2012). For example, it could play movies and music, edit photos
and could send and receive text messages(Barrett, 2012). Apple, Inc. was revolutionary in their
iPhone. Apple sold 6.1 million original iPhone units over five quarters after its inception (Fast
Company, 2011). The two initial models, a 4GB model priced at $499 and an 8 GB model for $599
went on sale June 29,2007 at 6:00Pm local time, while hundreds of customers lined up outside the
stores nationwide; people wanted to be the first to get the phone that could do everything (Fast
Company, 2011). Now an Apple iPhone has more technology and computing power in it than the
first Apollo space ship (Fast Company, 2011)