A feeling of deep anger and resentment. Bitter is an emotion which encompasses both anger and hate, often people who are bitter appear to the world as just going around pissed off at everyone and everything. However bitter is often a result of some past event which has hurt, scarred and jaded the person. 

A bitter person inspires such emotions. Let’s look at some descriptors: unhappy/depressed, angry, hostile, resentful, dwelling on past wrongs, stubborn, wounded, moody, lashing out at others, ranting about wrongs, carrying emotional baggage, stuck in a rut, blaming others, stereotyping and scapegoating, agitated, negative and critical, defensive, holding grudges, raging, maliciousness. Not a pretty picture. If this is you, it’s a miserable existence. If you constantly interact with a bitter person, you’ll be miserable also.  An online article by Peter Michelson states that, “bitterness feeds on the carcasses of festering memories.”  Yuck! 
 
If you are a bitter person, you probably developed this attitude over a long period of time. You may have been seriously or grievously hurt, you may have been bullied as a child or adult, you may be sensitive to social injustices. There are many reasons why individuals develop this predominant feeling.  Either you never received help and support for these issues or you were too angry and hostile to accept assistance. Over time, the bitter person begins to feel that he or she is right and becomes highly critical of others. While bitterness starts with a negative outlook, it takes control and consumes someone, then spreads and infects others. Bitterness causes social relationships to sour and in fact the bitter person is often rejected by others.  As you picture the emotional and physical states of bitterness and resentment, you understand the internal conflict, the need for vigilance and defensiveness about the bitter ideas, the anxiety and negativity, tension, fear and sleeplessness of the condition. A true statement: bitterness is like drinking poison and expecting that the other person will die. In fact research has shown that the internal poison of bitterness does cause physical ailments and at times a shorter life span: yours!
 
Do bitter individuals receive help? Very few view themselves as having a problem. The cause of their distress is always something or someone else, or at least that’s the way they see things.  If you are chronically bitter, listen up! Even though you may have very valid concerns, a bitter attitude will cause you increased misery and will drive away potential sources of help.  Your emotional bitterness will in fact become an ongoing cause of the problems you are experiencing now.  All aspects of your life will eventually suffer, especially your social relationships, your health and your emotional stability. Bitterness will always chase away love in your heart and your life.  The first and most important step, then, is seeing that you are a part of the problem. In most cases, in fact, you are the only part of the problem that you can control and change now. While the original fault lies elsewhere, most likely that person or persons won’t change. You are responsible for your life and happiness now, and you need to let go of the bitterness.
 
I recommend a four step process to help you move out of this oppressive state of being. While recognizing your loss and the importance of these problems in your personal development, realize that it’s time to grieve these losses.  Send love to yourself and shed some tears over the injustices done to you as a child and over your lifetime. The next step would be to take action, take control of your problems and seek assistance for yourself.   Make a conscious effort to stop the ruminations and expressions of bitterness in your life. Instead, seek more satisfaction now, in your day-to-day existence, because the past cannot be changed. The third step is forgiveness. Oh no, you’ll say, the problems are too real and the “bad guys” remain unpunished. The therapeutic concept of forgiveness is to recognize injustice, then let go of the anger and resentment. This type of forgiveness will not affect the right/wrong elements of your issues. I have articles on my website about forgiveness as well as a Hawaiian-based solution called Ho’oponopono. There are beautiful meditations with music which will chip away at your bitter shell to open you up to healing and love vibrations. The last step would be to recognize and develop an attitude of gratefulness for the positives you have in your current life. A bitter attitude will poison all the positives around you while gratitude will open you up to happiness and joy in your life.
What is the process that leads to bitter? 
When a person believes she is subject to injustice, anger may be felt. But if she also feels impotence to react, because the one who caused the injustice is too strong that one cannot oppose it, this triggers sadness. This mix of sadness and anger that action cannot rescue, and that cannot be expressed, gives rise to a long-lasting disappointment and sadness, which results in bitter. Moreover, if the injustice that caused bitter is brought about by another person, or simply you believe another is the cause of your bitter, then you also start to feel grunge toward the other, with grudge being a restrained anger toward someone that one cannot act out [14]. Thus, bitter might be considered the individual—non social— side of grudge.
J Multimodal User Interfaces (2010) 3: 79–86 DOI 10.1007/s12193-009-0021-9 ORIGINAL PAPER The mental ingredients of bitter Isabella Poggi · Francesca D’Errico Received: 7 April 2009 / Accepted: 11 November 2009 / Published online: 2 December 2009 © OpenInterface Association 2009 Abstract In view of multimodal interfaces capable of a detailed representation of the User’s possible emotions, the paper analyses bitter in terms of its mental ingredients, the beliefs and goals represented in the mind of a person when feeling an emotion. Bitter is a negative emotion in between anger and sadness: like anger, it is caused by a sense of injustice, but also entails a sense of impotence which makes it similar to sadness. Often caused by betrayal, it comes from the disappointment of an expectation from oneself or anothers with whom one is affectively involved, or from a disproportion between commitment and actual results. The ingredients found in a pilot study were tested through qualitative analysis of a further questionnaire, which confirmed the ingredients hypothesized, further revealing the different nature of bitter across ages and across types of work. Keywords Bitter · Social emotion · Cognitive model of emotion 1 Multimodal Interfaces and the analysis of emotions A relevant area in research on Multimodal Interfaces is the construction of Empathic Agents [13]. In principle, an empathic agent should emulate an empathic human as close as possible, but so far it may not yet be so. In a human, we must I. Poggi · F. D’Errico () Dipartimento di Scienze dell’Educazione, Università Roma Tre, Rome, Italy e-mail: francesca.derrico@uniroma1.it I. Poggi e-mail: poggi@uniroma3.it distinguish between feeling empathy and expressing empathy (a nurse may feel deep empathy toward a patient and yet not display it, not to let him worry more; if someone I hate had an unlucky accident I may hypocritically show sorry to him). Agents are not as yet able to feel empathy for the User, while they can express it. Yet, it is not the same to show empathy in case of positive vs. negative emotions, nor, within the same valence, for joy vs. pride, or sadness vs. anger. So, whether or not an Empathic Agent can feel emotions, to be empathic it must be endowed with an internal representation of the other’s emotion. In the last decades research on emotion has gone far away. Several domains have been widely and deeply explored, functions of emotions, neuro-physiological mechanisms, verbal and multimodal communication, effects on everyday life, allowing advances in Affective Computing and emotion simulation. Nonetheless, more in depth investigation is needed at least in two aspects of emotion research. On the one hand, the range of emotions studied is still narrow. Maybe because investigation often moved from the standpoint of emotion expression, a great number of studies have been devoted to the so called, famous, primary emotions: presumably innate, universal, displayed by the same expressive pattern in all cultures, and of early emergence. But the primary ones are only a bunch of emotions in the infinite number of affects we happen to feel in our everyday life. It is (unfortunately) very rare that we feel happiness, and not so frequent, also, that we feel disgust. Even fear (fortunately) is not an emotion we feel everyday, except, perhaps, in countries confronting a war. Nonetheless, our everyday life is full of emotions, that, albeit different from the primary ones, actually colour our mood and make us feel merry or upset. At work, for example, emotions heavily affect our relationship with colleagues, bosses, and customers: we often feel envy or indignation, anxiety or humili- 80 J Multimodal User Interfaces (2010) 3: 79–86 ation, contempt, admiration, sense of injustice or bitter. So the time has come to focus also on these “Cinderella” emotions: ones that do not always give rise to a canonical bodily expression, and yet are very important in determining our quality of life. Another problem in present emotion Affective Computing research is the lack of a deep and thorough conceptual analysis of the emotions under focus: a search for the specific beliefs implied in different emotions, that characterize and distinguish each single affective state from all others. Such an in-depth analysis would be useful for Multimodal Interfaces and Empathic Agents: a detailed representation of the beliefs implied by a certain emotion might be taken into account by the Interface to update its User Model and tailor its empathic expression by focusing on certain aspects of the User’s feeling more than on others. Suppose the Empathic Agent is a friend that helps you regulate your emotions: it should display very different behaviours if you were feeling, for example, bitter instead of anger, where feelings, beliefs and action tendencies are very different. Only a representation that distinguishes the two emotions might result in more appropriate empathic reactions. To confront these issues, this paper studies bitter, an emotion that people happen to feel with fair frequency, and that may have a relevant impact on their daily life. We propose an analysis of bitter in terms of its mental ingredients, the beliefs and goals that are supposedly represented in the mind of a person when s/he is feeling an emotion. Our analysis is tested through two empirical studies that investigate people’s definitions of bitter and descriptions of their feelings and experiences in this emotion. 2 Bitter Bitter has not been subject to specific analytical study in the psychological domain. An isolated exception is feminist literature where, within the exploration of anger, bitter is defined as “a refusal to forgive and forget”, a tendency “to maintain a vivid sense of the wrongs one has been done, to recite one’s angry litany of loss long past the time others may care to listen or sympathize” [10]; but also, “a rational response to the frustration of important and legitimate hopes” [3]. Starting from these definitions, Campbell observes that bitter differs from anger for its failure of uptake, since the one who is recounting his injury here fails to be listened to. While people devote attention to one expressing anger, when someone accuses you to be “bitter” he is silencing you, as if annoyed of listening to your complaint, and thus dismisses you, that is, he subtracts any importance to your being and saying. Yet, this analysis of bitter is only sketched, since Campbell’s paper mainly focuses on the political sense of being accused of being “bitter”. A close feeling is grudge [14]: a kind of silent hate that lives on through rumination of the wrong received, and sometimes made. But while grudge is a “social emotion”, since it is definitely directed to another, bitter is a sort of sad anger, that is hopelessly retorted to oneself. To provide a more analytical definition of bitter we need to find out its “mental ingredients”. 3 Mental ingredients: an approach to the analysis of emotions The view of emotions we adopt for our analysis is a cognitive model in terms of goals and beliefs [6]. As in other models [7, 15] an emotion is seen as an adaptive device that monitors the state of achievement or thwarting of a person’s important goals: a complex subjective state encompassing cognitive, physiological, expressive, motivational aspects, which is triggered as one believes that a current event causes or is likely to cause the achievement or thwarting of one’s adaptively important goals [4, 5]. The cognitive side of an emotion includes the “mental ingredients” that, according to this view, must be represented in the mind of a person who is feeling that emotion: beliefs, expectations, evaluations, causal attributions, referred to an assumed or imagined event that is relevant for one of the person’s important goals, but also the goal that is monitored by that emotion, and the goals triggered by it [9, 11, 12]. To discover the mental ingredients of an emotion one must go through real or fictitious cases, collected either through the researcher’s introspective analysis or through empirical research, in which that emotion actually has been or in principle can be felt. The features shared by all positive examples are the ingredients of that emotion. Yet, one should distinguish the minimal necessary set of ingredients from those that may add in some examples but not in others: when you think of cases in which you might feel or actually have felt an emotion, some are prototypical cases of it, while others are not, and yet they can still be examples of that emotion. For instance, looking for the conditions to feel guilty, one that immediately comes to mind is responsibility, which pops up in the most typical cases of guilt feelings, e.g. if you run over someone because you’re drunk. But in some cases there is no responsibility, and yet guilt may be felt: take the survivors of concentration camps who feel guilty even if they had no responsibility for the others’ death. The real crucial condition for feeling guilty is the sense of inequity of an event, whether or not due to our responsibility [4]. In brief, some ingredients of an emotion, some apparently crucial conditions of it in fact don’t hold in all instances of that emotion, but only in its prototypical cases, while others are so necessary that without them the emotion cannot be felt: these constitute the “core” ingredients of that emotion, J Multimodal User Interfaces (2010) 3: 79–86 81 and are common to both prototypical and more peripheral cases, while others only hold for the most central examples. Thus we must not constrain research to prototypical cases of the emotion, but take all positive cases into account, to find all the ingredients and distinguish the “core” ones that are present also in non-prototypical cases. 4 The ingredients of bitter. A pilot study To find out the mental ingredients of bitter, we first designed a pilot study to define this emotion on the basis of real examples. 40 subjects were submitted a questionnaire of 18 open, yes-no and multiple choice questions concerning the following topics: 1. Definition: questions asking to narrate a case of bitter, tell the cause of this emotion, and describe its specific feeling 2. Mental states: questions paraphrasing the ingredients hypothesized to test how much the are present in the subjects’ feeling of bitter 3. Fields of occurrence: a question asking if bitter is experienced more often in work, school, politics, sport, entertainment, family, love or friendship 4. Relation to other emotions: one question about how far bitter is from disgust, disappointment, resignation, grudge, contempt, sense of injustice, anger, sadness, resentment, regret, indignation, impotence and revenge 5. Ways, effects and functions of the communication of bitter: questions asking if and how the subject communicates it; how can s/he understand it from others’ behaviour, and what are the effects of communicating it or not on future relationships 6. Impersonating bitter: one question asked subjects to impersonate bitter: “Imagine you are on the stage and you have the feeling of bitter talk: you impersonate it. What do you think it would say? How could it describe itself?”. From the participants’ answers we singled out a list of mental ingredients, some always and necessarily present, others present only in some prototypical cases. Let us first highlight the ingredients in a prototypical example: feeling betrayed by someone you trusted. I believe that trust is a very important value in friendship; once I came to know that a friend of mine had concealed something to me, not telling me the truth: she had betrayed that absolute value of trust, and I did not expect it in any way. I felt bitter and, in fact, disappointment, out of a behaviour I thought could never occur. This example is prototypical in that it contains many crucial ingredients of bitter: A person A expects some behaviour X from another person B, with whom A is affectively involved. A believes B is committed to do X. But B disconfirms A’s expectation, and this causes that a goal of A is thwarted. Sometimes, though, also a feeling of injustice adds to those ingredients: (I felt bitter) at school when I got a bad grade in physics after I had studied it very much and it was my birthday. Even more specifically, in some cases what causes bitter is the peculiar harm and injustice of being humiliated It is an emotion caused by a situation in which a person addresses another with arrogance, presumption, almost as in a power abuse. In any case, A feels that harm (the goal thwarting) is irreversible: Then, with time passing, (relations) improved, but they have never been again as before. To sum up, the ingredients of bitter in its prototypical cases are the following: 1. goal A has a goal G 2. responsibility A believes B is responsible for the fulfilment of G 3. commitment A believes B is committed to G’s fulfilment 4. expectation A expects B will cause/allow the fulfilment of G 5. involvement A is involved (wants to have positive relations) with B 6. disappointment A’s expectation is disconfirmed 7. goal thwarting A’s goal G is thwarted 8. irreversible In an irreversible way 9. injustice This is unjust for B A feels bitter when his goal G is thwarted in an irreversible way causing injustice to A, and when A believes that the responsible for this thwarting is another person B, with whom A is affectively involved, whom A expected would allow or cause the fulfilment of G, who A believes was committed to fulfil it, and who disconfirmed A’s expectation. Yet, in some examples of our pilot study not all of these ingredients are present: The case in which I felt bitter was during the oral examination at Grammar School, because it did not go the way I would have liked, and I immediately felt bitter since in my opinion I could have done more, but it was late. In this case, the person A believes was committed to ful- fil G is A herself, and the ingredient of injustice does not seem to be present. At most, A feels she betrayed herself: 82 J Multimodal User Interfaces (2010) 3: 79–86 she somehow feels guilty toward herself, responsible for an irreversible harm she inflicted to herself. Thus, a common ingredient of bitter, either caused by others or by oneself, is responsibility for a non-achieved goal. As put by a subject. Bitter is an emotion you feel when you had the possibility to do something to achieve a goal, but this was not done and as a consequence the goal has not been achieved. The sense of bitter due to disconfirmed expectation and inequity may be also caused by the disproportion between personal investment and actual results. After years of study, fatigue and striving I still can’t find my own realization in the work domain. In other cases, the salient ingredient is only injustice, due to non-motivated harm. I, for example, felt bitter when something happened that caused pain to someone without an acceptable motivation and no one could contribute to soften such pain. When the father of a friend of mine died, I used to feel a deep bitter while thinking of her suffering, but I did not know how to soften her pain. Actually, some of the ingredients of bitter, goal thwarting, expectation, involvement, the other’s responsibility, and injustice, are typical ingredients of anger. But goal thwarting following an expectation is the core of disappointment [11], while another aspect likens bitter to sadness: a feeling of impotence to react, to recover the damage undergone, because those who caused the injustice are stronger than we are. In fact, you typically feel bitter when you struggle with very powerful agencies, like, say, mafia, or a judiciary system that is unjust and iniquitous: you feel them too more strong and powerful than you, and conclude you have no chance to win over them. Your sense of injustice is high, but you feel you cannot do anything to overcome it; if, as [3] puts it, “an expression of bitter begins its life at some point as intended anger”, you start feeling that your cry of anger has no point, no weapons to win, and anger becomes restrained anger, since it cannot find anyone to listen. Beside impotence to react, bitter also entails the very impotence to express one’s disappointment. It is a kind of restrained disappointment that lasts in time, just because restrained. As goes a subject’s definition, Bitter is a sensation you can feel after a great disappointment. Disappointment can leave you this sense of void, of bitter, that can last in time. What is the process that leads to bitter? When a person believes she is subject to injustice, anger may be felt. But if she also feels impotence to react, because the one who caused the injustice is too strong that one cannot oppose it, this triggers sadness. This mix of sadness and anger that action cannot rescue, and that cannot be expressed, gives rise to a long-lasting disappointment and sadness, which results in bitter. Moreover, if the injustice that caused bitter is brought about by another person, or simply you believe another is the cause of your bitter, then you also start to feel grunge toward the other, with grudge being a restrained anger toward someone that one cannot act out [14]. Thus, bitter might be considered the individual—non social— side of grudge. 5 A quanti-qualitative analysis of bitter The pilot study above resulted in a set of ingredients that we hypothesize define the emotion of bitter. By taking them as a working hypothesis, in a subsequent study 110 subjects (35 males (32%) and 75 (68%) females), between 14 and 78 years old (32.9 m) were submitted another questionnaire, slightly modified with respect to the former, of 18 open, yes-no and multiple choice questions. A quantiqualitative analysis of the answers will be overviewed in a subsequent work; here we test the psychological validity of the ingredients found in the pilot study by focusing on the questions concerning the definition of the emotion, its fields of occurrence, its relation to other emotions, its communication, and the question on impersonating bitter. We obtained a corpus which counts 14058 (V ) occurrences with 2811 (N) different words and a medium lexical richness index [(V/N) · 100], equal to 19,99%. An automatic quanti-qualitative analysis was performed on the subjects’ answers by TalTac (Trattamento Automatico Lessicale e Testuale per l’Analisi del Contenuto, i.e. “Lexical and Textual Automatic Processing for Content Analysis”: [2]), a software for textual data analysis based on a “lexicometric approach”: an application of statistical principles to textual corpora. The “textual statistics” [8] aims to extract the semantic level in a text starting from the list of words obtained by statistical analysis; for example, in the specificities’ analysis, the software extracts a list of significant words obtained by a statistical comparison between sub-parts of text according to selected variables. 5.1 Textual and lexical analysis The lexical analysis includes some descriptive information, particularly interesting for the understanding of bitter, like theme words which represent the most frequent words out of all occurrences, adjective analysis and time analysis. Theme words. Theme words show the main topics considered in the answers of the questionnaire: the definition J Multimodal User Interfaces (2010) 3: 79–86 83 through similar emotions like disappointment (77 occurrences), resentment (15), sadness (37); the main modality of expression (silences, silence, respectively 29 and 18 occ.) and some ingredients of bitter like expectation (15 occ.) and trust (14). Adjective analysis. We used the dictionary of positive and negative adjectives present in TalTac2 by analysing the negative index1 to identify polarization through positive or negative lexicon. The index reveals that the characteristics of negative polarity of words in the corpus is as high as 76%, that is higher than the reference value (40% according to a research based on Italian corpora; [1]). The adjectives are focused on the negative emotional experience surrounding bitter: among the most frequent, wounded, powerless, sad, empty. Time analysis. Time analysis reveals an orientation to the past, because out of all verb frequencies our subjects express time information most frequently as past tense (68%, as opposed to 29% present and 3% future), but out of the three categories of age, “up to 25”, “from 26 to 40”, and “from 41 on”, this percentage increases up to 70% for the third one. So in defining bitter they tend to describe the time of the emotion as time told rather than time lived, possibly to put distance between themselves and their feeling, and to have a more complex interpretation of facts. Such an interpretation is also supported by the frequent use of reflective verbs like considered, believed, expected, thought; this is also coherent with the idea of bitter as an emotion of memory, of a negative past, and as a way to ruminate over one’s wrongs [3], as well as with the ingredient of failed expectation seen above. – I expected more collaboration from my collaborators, colleagues and workers ... – When a person at work that I believed trustworthy in many ways tried to stop me – For instance when a person I considered a friend concealed me important things 5.2 The peculiar lexicon of bitter Beyond the absolute value of words, the key words or peculiar lexicon [2] are the words that result over-represented in the text under analysis by comparing the corpus to an external frequency lexicon, taken as a reference model.2 The measure of the variance from the reference lexicon is represented by the standard deviation, which is the deviation between the form frequencies in the analyzed text and in the frequency lexicon [2]. 1The index is obtained by calculating the ratio between the total of negative occurrences and the total of positive ones (tot. Occ. Neg/tot. Occ. Pos·100). 2In this case we used the standard Italian, resource in Taltac. Table 1 Personal investment s.d Graphical form s.d Graphical form Relational trust 14.45 Boyfriend 33.37 Reliable 13.17 Engaged 33.37 Trusted 5.77 Girlfriend 26.59 Trust 13.17 Engaged 23.92 Confident 11.25 Engagement 20.89 to trust Commitment 20.89 Being confident 33.37 Commit myself Affection 27.15 Profuse 65.63 Friend 12.11 Ttraining 43.02 Friendship 4.32 Engagement 36.18 Feelings Giving verbs 19.05 Friends 19.01 Giving him 13.17 Friendly 11.66 Gave From the corpus of answers we extracted some semantic areas that are quite close to the ingredients of bitter previously hypothesized. First, a very large area of PERSONAL INVESTMENT (Table 1) is mainly represented in terms of relational trust (to trust, trust, reliable, confidential, confident), AFFECTION (friend, friends, friendship, affection, emotion, girlfriend, boyfriend, care), COMMITMENT (to commit myself, engagement, training), and corresponds to verbs of giving (giving, gave, offered). The second semantic area refers to a central aspect of bitter: FAILED EXPECTATIONS. Subjects often use the past tense of estimation verbs like expect, believe, think, attributing the cause of bitter to past and to beliefs of betrayal. Further, some terms recurrently refer to a SENSE OF INJUSTICE and to BAD FAITH or DECEPTION, a tendency to attribute a heavier responsibility to the “betrayer” (Table 2). Bitter is then an emotion caused by rumination about an enduring injustice; in this line the feminist approach [3] admits that it does not involve only gender but in general disadvantaged groups, including, as to persons the divorced, disabled, ill, and as to groups, the working class. She points out the positive role of bitter as “refusal to forgive and to forget (...) to maintain a sense of the wrongs one has been done” [10, 146], as a way to store the condensed injustices; in this sense is bitter an emotion of memory. While talking of bitter, participants frequently imply a semantic core of impotence, powerlessness, to be interpreted in two senses. One is impotence of doing something to overcome injustice or to change a situation, due to one’s low level of control over circumstances. – To feel bitter means that you cannot change things when you really would like they were different – A feeling that expresses the impossibility of achieving the goal one imagines to achieve – The impossibility of modifying the situations one is living 84 J Multimodal User Interfaces (2010) 3: 79–86 Table 2 Failed expectation s.d Graphical form s.d Graphical form Cognitive expectation 8.67 I knew 82.00 You expected 7.66 We expert 70.94 You believed Sense of injustice 65.95 Expectations 49.90 Unjustly 35.78 I believed 34.96 Injustice 29.19 I expected 12.61 Unjust 28.13 Expected Bad faith/reception 27.15 They were foreseeing 56.77 Betrayed (fem.) 26.34 Certainties 47.19 Betrayed (pl.) 25.93 Right 35.58 Betrayal 23.63 Esteem 33.37 Naughty things 23.44 Broken 20.89 Artificially 20.89 You thought 15.36 Deceptions 19.01 Disappointed 11.66 Betrays 10.22 Expectation 8.15 Deception 9.15 Failed 7.66 Trap The second sense of impotence is the difficulty of expressing bitter. Often subjects confirm they didn’t express bitter to the person who had caused it, although they express it to other people. – Now I know that to feel better I should have expressed my bitter, and I understand it from my own attitude, from how nervous I feel – I wouldn’t have managed to express my affective state, it is difficult to manifest one’s feelings to someone who showed not very sensitive – It is not a feeling I can express or describe easily; it is a feeling of anger and regret that I feel mainly toward myself The lexical analysis of Table 3 shows words like silence, silent, depression, apathy, closeness, close myself, others mentioning non-verbal communication like gazes, face, and finally verbs of dissimulation like mask, conceal, hide, forget. Finally a deep uneasiness is represented by a nervous mood expressed by words like irritation, snorting, imprecating. 5.3 The characteristic lexicon of bitter The analysis of specificities aims to identify the characteristic lexicon by comparing different sub-parts of text. The characteristic lexicon is created by dividing a corpus into sub-texts (so called sub-occurrences) according to the different levels of a chosen variable (e.g., to characterize a lexicon by gender, you divide the corpus into male and female subtexts). Then the different sub-texts are compared, by a t-test analysis, to extract a list of words over-represented or underrepresented with respect to a normal distribution3 [2, 8]. In the present study, we chose two main variables, age (up to 25 years old; from 26 to 40; from 41 on) and type of work (worker, housewife, student, self-employed). In the young subjects we find a sort of “light bitter” oriented toward something external (towards, towards someone; p < 0.01), mainly injustice about University or in a competition (score, injustice; p < 0.01). The frequent graphic form who might be an impersonal way to define bitter by mentioning a case in which the subject is not involved. Here are some of the participants’ accounts. – When there are people who waste thousands of euros for a car and others that really can’t afford one this is injustice – When a friend of mine had a better grade and he had studied less than I had – When I quarrelled with a friend of mine, long time ago, during a game between friends Furthermore, the youth consider it possible to express the negative emotion (express, felt) and to improve the damaged relation (as in the case of improved below): – Slightly better, because I got rid of what I was feeling inside. The relationships improved – It was a way to give vent to it: I expressed it by trying to have a dialogue and understand why With subjects from 26 to 40, two ingredients starts to appear. One is the sense of IMPOTENCE, emerging for example in conditionals like would be (p > 0.01); the other is POINTLESS COMMITMENT and striving, mainly at work. Bitter in organizational contexts make the quality of life at work go worse. – Because it would have been self-defeating – Because it would have been pointless – Too difficult to find the words, and I thought it would have not be useful, may be worse – Notwithstanding commitment and devotion there was no acknowledgement of the quality and value of my work – After so much of a striving, I saw my job stolen by an incompetent girl with no experience, but “intimate” Useless commitment can also be seen in subjects who, again at work, committed their esteem to someone who did not deserve it – I felt bitter as I realized I had trusted and esteemed a person who did not deserve it. I was disappointed by the betrayal of my trust 3The characteristic element index is calculated for all the units with a frequency of more than 5, with a probability threshold set at 5% through T-test [2, 145]. J Multimodal User Interfaces (2010) 3: 79–86 85 Table 3 Impotence s.d Graphical form s.d Graphical form s.d Graphical form Impotence 47.19 To give vent 13.17 Melancholic 52.10 Impotence 42.45 Nervousness 12.48 Ridde 38.02 Impotent 36.47 Physically 12.11 Silent 23.44 To be able (for myself) 33.37 Close myself 11.66 Annoyance 9.70 Impossibility 33.37 Puffing 5.86 Pessimism 9.39 To be able (for it) 33.37 imprecations Dissimulation Difficult to express 31.20 Grimaces 22.15 Impersonate 520.53 Silences 27.99 closure 16.69 Dissimulate 289.52 Gazes 27.15 Silent 13.83 Mask 191.70 Espress it 27.15 Depressed 9.49 Conceal 100.54 Facial 27.15 Apathy 7.25 Remove 87.92 Expression 27.15 Masse 5.89 Disappear 55.65 Silence 26.61 Cold 5.66 Forget 51.59 Mood 19.01 Shy 4.71 Hide 50.26 Face 16.75 Cry Table 4 Light bitter (up to 25 years old) Grafic form tot occ. sub occ. p-value Score 5 5 0.01 Feelings 11 8 0.01 Felt 28 16 0.01 So that 6 5 0.02 Bettered 6 5 0.02 Injustice 6 5 0.02 Who 14 9 0.02 I was feeling 8 6 0.03 Express 8 6 0.03 Toward 28 15 0.03 Friend 13 8 0.05 Towards 13 8 0.05 Subjects from 41 on acknowledge a “deep bitter” using words of high intensity (pain, deep, feeling of emptiness, wound); they report an inner bitter closed in themselves: they strongly remember (memory, p < 0.01) but refrain from expression (silence, p < 0.01). Finally, different types of work entail different ways to live bitter. Factory workers, housewives and shop assistants tend to explain it in from a subjective point of view, as a way to understand and to find a sense of this emotion, lived with high intensity; they define it in terms of memory, emptiness, reason, pain, soul, empty out, lived (p < 0.05), just like in Campbell’s [3] definition of bitter for the disadvantage group. To the contrary, bitter is described by autonomous workers, doctors and students in a more relational way: they adopt external attribution, identifying causes and reTable 5 Deep bitter (from 41 years old) Grafic form tot occ. sub occ. p-value Memory 6 5 0.01 Pain 26 13 0.01 Deep 11 7 0.01 Sadness 48 20 0.02 I thought 7 5 0.02 Empty 16 8 0.04 Strong 6 4 0.05 Wound 6 4 0.05 Death 6 4 0.05 Silence 23 5 0.02 sponsibilities or other contextual aspects (expectations, job, waited, detached, improved, vote, towards, who; p < 0.05). 6 General discussion The manual and automatic qualitative analyses performed in the two studies provide a coherent picture of the mental ingredients and processes of bitter. The ingredients found in the pilot study were confirmed and enriched through by the automatic analysis. Take the focus on temporality, which points to the importance of rumination for the very definition of bitter. As an expectation is disconfirmed you may feel disappointment, but only thanks to rumination can bitter be felt: re-living your past experience contributes to make you feel how irreversible the goal thwarting is. The relevance of time may also account for why bitter is more deeply felt by older than younger people: older people 86 J Multimodal User Interfaces (2010) 3: 79–86 have had more time to ruminate, but also to discover how irreversible the damage was. And irreversibility is even more severe if you have, not only more time in you past, but less time in your future, to recover from irreversible damage. So while in a young person bitter may be overcome by optimism and hope in the future, and the wrong cured, in an old one there is no more time and the wrong remains pending. 7 Conclusion A clear and detailed representation of emotions may help to construct Multimodal Interfaces capable of sophisticated interaction and empathic communication. Bitter is an emotion that may have a relevant impact on people’s quality of life in everyday affective relations and in work. This paper aimed to find the mental ingredients of bitter, the beliefs and goals represented in the mind of a person who is feeling it. Bitter is a negative emotion caused by a somehow irreversible thwarting of a goal. Something in between anger and sadness, like anger it is often due to a sense of injustice, sometimes also caused with full responsibility; but it entails a sense of impotence—impotence both to react to injustice and to cry out one’s anger—which makes it similar to sadness. Its feeling is due to the disappointment of an expectation about the behaviour of oneself, of another person one is affectively involved with, or of some agency one believes should guard justice. The disappointed expectation may take the form of a sense of betrayal, but sometimes simply comes from a disproportion between lavished effort or commitment and actual outcomes, and, when processed through rumination, results in bitter. 
