IEEE PHOTONICS TECHNOLOGY LETTERS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, JUNE 1999 653
1.5- m-Band Wavelength Conversion
Based on Cascaded Second-Order
Nonlinearity in LiNbO Waveguides
M. H. Chou, I. Brener, M. M. Fejer, E. E. Chaban, and S. B. Christman
Abstract—We report wavelength conversion and spectral inversion
using cascaded second-order nonlinearity in periodically
poled LiNbO3 waveguides pumped at 1.5 m. The converter
has an internal conversion efficiency of 8
dB, a conversion
band of 76 nm, and a constant conversion efficiency for
the 50-dB range of signal powers tested.
Index Terms—Nonlinear optics, optical fiber communications,
optical frequency conversion, wavelength conversion, wavelengthdivision
multiplexing.
WAVELENGTH conversion is an important function
in wavelengt-division-multiplexed (WDM) optical networks.
Among numerous demonstrated wavelength conversion
techniques, difference frequency generation (DFG) [1] is attractive
in several respects: it is an instantaneous process
that easily accommodates more than terahertz modulation
bands, can simultaneously up and down convert multiple
channels with equal efficiencies, has negligible spontaneous
emission noise and has no intrinsic frequency chirp.
DFG-based wavelength converters have been demonstrated
in AlGaAs [1], [2] and LiNbO waveguides [3]–[5], showing
promising results for WDM wavelength conversion. However,
the use of DFG and current device efficiencies indictate the
need for a single mode pump laser with 50–100 mW of
power operating in the 750–800-nm range. Moreover, it is
difficult to simultaneously launch the 780-nm pump and 1.5-
m band signals into the fundamental mode of the waveguide,
although this has been solved using an integrated mode
coupling structure [4] In this letter, we demonstrate wavelength
conversion in LiNbO waveguides using a cascaded secondorder
nonlinearity [6]–[8], where both the input
pump and signals are in the 1.5- m band. Mode matching in
this case is simplified compared to DFG pumped at 780 nm,
since all input wavelengths are in the same band and can be
launched into a single port.
The -based device for 1.5- m band wavelength
conversion uses a pump in the 1550-nm region. The pump
at frequency is upconverted to frequency by secondManuscript
received November 24, 1998; revised February 16, 1999. This
work was supported by the Office of Naval Research through JSEP, by
Lucent Technologies, and by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
through the CNOM at Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
M. H. Chou and M. M. Fejer are with E. L. Ginzton Laboratory, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA 94305-4085 USA.
I. Brener, E. E. Chaban, and S. B. Christman are with Bell Laboratories,
Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ 07974 USA.
Publisher Item Identifier S 1041-1135(99)04221-4.
harmonic generation (SHG) via the second-order nonlinearity
. The generated simultaneously mixes with input
signals to generate wavelength shifted outputs
by DFG via another process. Phasematching
between interacting waves for both SHG and DFG is required,
and this can be accomplished by choosing an appropriate
quasi-phasematching (QPM) grating period. It is interesting to
note that this process mimics four-wave mixing
(FWM) which uses the third-order nonlinearity The
effective of such process in LiNbO under quasiphasematching
condition is – times larger than that of silica
glass. The allows the use of a very short sample
when compared to fiber, and has better noise figure compared
to FWM in semiconductor optical amplifiers. The converted
output is related to pump power and input signal power in the
low conversion efficiency approximation by [7]
(1)
where and are converted output power, pump
power and signal power, respectively. is the normalized
efficiency (the same for SHG and near degenerate DFG) in
units of mW cm (this number is proportional to both
the mode overlap between the interacting waves and the
material nonlinearity , and is the interaction length.
The conversion efficiency scales with the fourth power of
the interaction length, so doubling the device length will
increase the conversion efficiency by a factor of 16. In the
high-conversion efficiency regime, the exponent of in 1 is
less than 4 due to pump depletion. In an optimized LiNbO
waveguide with a normalized efficiency of 150%/W cm (or
0.0015 mW cm and 6-cm interaction length, one can
achieve 0-dB conversion efficiency with 75 mW of pump
power; or 3-dB gain with 100 mW of pump power.
We fabricated the waveguides by annealed proton exchange
in periodically poled LiNbO (PPLN) [9]. The device used
in this experiment is 4 cm long, has a QPM period of 15
m, waveguide width of 12 m, proton exchange depth of
0.7 m, and was annealed for 26 h at 325 C. The above
parameters allow phasematching at room temperature between
the fundamental mode of the pump at 1556 nm and the
fundamental mode of SHG wave at 778 nm. We can tune the
pump wavelength by using waveguides with different QPM
period and/or temperature tuning. The normalized efficiency
of this device is 65%/W cm . One can achieve a normalized
efficiency of 150%/W cm by optimizing the mode overlap
1041–1135/99$10.00 ? 1999 IEEE
654 IEEE PHOTONICS TECHNOLOGY LETTERS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, JUNE 1999
Fig. 1. Experimental setup. ECL: External cavity laser. BPF: Bandpass filter.
PPLN WG: Periodically poled LiNbO3 waveguide. OSA: Optical spectrum
analyzer. The waveguide is fiber coupled at both the input and the output.
The later is analyzed by an OSA and power meter.
between the fundamental mode of the pump and the first highorder
mode of the second harmonic. At the input and output of
this device, the waveguides are optimized for fiber coupling by
tapering a section of 1-mm length to adiabatically transform
the modes into and out of the wavelength conversion sections.
Fig. 1 shows a schematic diagram of the experimental setup
used in this work. The pump laser is an external cavity laser
(ECL) amplified by an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA)
to a level of 300 mW and filtered through a FBG in order to
supress the amplified spontaneous emission (ASE). This pump
is combined with signal sources generated in four different
ECL’s and fiber launched into the waveguides. The output of
the waveguide is fiber coupled and later analyzed in an optical
spectrum analyzer (OSA) and power meter. The fiber to fiber
coupling loss in this configuration is 4.5 dB due to reflection
losses at the uncoated endfaces ( 1.7 dB), mode mismatching
between the fibers and the waveguide ( 1.3 dB), and intrinsic
waveguide losses ( 1.5 dB, i.e., 0.35 dB/cm).
We first characterized the device by measuring the SHG
power versus pump wavelength. We chose to keep the waveguide
at 90 C (or higher) in order to avoid photorefractive
effects. This effectively shifts the phasematching wavelength
to 1562 nm, but keeps the other parameters unchanged. The
device shows a near-ideal sinc wavelength tuning curve with
a peak internal efficiency (output SHG power divided by
square of input pump power) of 500%/W and an FWHM of
0.27 nm at low pump power. At higher pump power ( 100
mW), the device displayed a distorted wavelength tuning
curve due to photorefractive effects of the generated secondharmonic
waves, which results in waveguide nonuniformity
and reduces the effective device length.
We performed simultaneous multichannel wavelength conversion
with a pump power of 110 mW launched inside the
waveguide; the results, in Fig. 2, show that the efficiencies
are the same ( 15 dB) for all the input channels. The best
conversion efficiency ( 8 dB) was obtained with a pump
power of 175 mW in a similar device with a slightly different
QPM period and operated at 120 C, as shown in the inset of
Fig. 2.
For -based wavelength converters, the converted
electric field is the complex conjugate of signal electric field,
meaning that the output electric field spectrum is the mirror
image of input spectrum about the pump wavelength. We show
the spectral inversion properties of our device in Fig. 3 using
an asymmetric input spectrum, formed by combining an ECL
Fig. 2. Simultaneous wavelength conversion of four WDM channels with
the same conversion efficiencies. Pump power is 110 mW inside the PPLN
waveguide at a wavelength of 1562 nm. The inset shows a 8-dB
conversion
efficiency of a similar device operated at 120 C with 175 mW of pump
power.
Fig. 3. Spectral inversion of the (2) : (2) wavelength converter. The
output electric field spectrum is the mirror image of input spectrum about the
pump wavelength, a feature that can be used to invert the signal chirp.
signal and filtered ASE from an EDFA. This feature can be
used to invert the signal chirp for dispersion management in
a transmission system.
Fig. 4 shows the measured band of this wavelength
converter when tuning the input signal wavelength while
keeping the pump wavelength fixed at 1562 nm. This device
has a 3-dB signal band of 76 nm, which is wider than
the theoretical band of an ideal 4-cm-long device due to
photorefractive effects at high pump powers.
We tested the linearity of this wavelength converter by
varying the input signal power, as shown in Fig. 5. We
measure a linear response for more than 50 dB with a
maximum input signal power of 0 dBm. The only saturation
mechanism in this device comes from the depletion of SHG or
pump power. We estimate a 0.16-dB deviation from linearity
for a input power of 0 dBm in an ideal 6-cm-long device with
a normalized efficiency of 150%/W cm and pump power of
100 mW. For a device with a 2.5-cm interaction length, a
normalized efficiency of 65%/W cm , and pumped by 100
mW, the deviation at 0-dBm signal power should be 0.006 dB,
which is smaller than the resolution in this experiment. Our
measurements confirm these estimates.
The conversion efficiency of this device currently is limited
by photorefractive effects at high pump powers, which can
CHOU et al.: 1.5- m-BAND WAVELENGTH CONVERSION 655
Fig. 4. Conversion efficiency vs. input signal wavelength. The closed circles
are the measured results and the solid line is a theoretical fit to a device with
an effective interaction length of 2.5 cm. The 1562-nm pump has a power of
135 mW inside the waveguide.
Fig. 5. Single-channel output/input transfer curve of the (2) : (2) wavelength
converter. This device has a linear response for more than 50-dB range
of input signal powers.
be reduced by operating at higher temperature or annealing
samples in an O atmosphere. In addition, it has been shown
that MgO:LiNbO has several orders of magnitude more
resistance to photorefractive effects than congruent LiNbO
and thus a similar device fabricated on MgO:LiNbO would
operate more efficiently.
In summary, we have demonstrated wavelength conversion
within the 1.5- m band using in PPLN waveguides.
This approach requires only lasers operating in the 1550-nm
region. We have shown spectral inversion and simultaneous
conversion of four WDM channels, a static internal conversion
efficiency of 8 dB, a conversion band of 76 nm, and
a linearity over an input power range of more than 50 dB.
With further improvements, a wavelength converter with 0-
dB conversion efficiency or even gain is a feasible goal. In
addition, this -based wavelength converter can also
function as clock recovery or time gating component by use
of a pulsed pump.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Crystal Technology for donating LiNbO
substrates and B. Eggleton for providing the fiber Bragg
grating.
